---
order: 1
title: Preparing for Learning
---

Before starting the training project in the course, set aside 30 minutes to organize your workflow for the first week. After testing, you can make adjustments for the second and subsequent weeks.

This assignment is particularly important for those who have not participated in long-term training for a while. Treat studying the course as regular training for your brain, during which your thinking is reprogrammed. Therefore, pay close attention to the assignments, and it's advisable to describe your thoughts (hypotheses) for each assignment in a few words. This will help you start thinking through writing. For example, you might respond to the second assignment like this: "I want to study the course in the morning before work for 30 minutes, then dedicate 1 hour in the afternoon, and another 30 minutes in the evening. To achieve this, I'll start shifting evening wakefulness to morning study time: I'll begin going to bed 15 minutes earlier and, by waking up earlier, I'll aim to study at least starting with 15 minutes a day, gradually increasing it to 30 minutes."

1. Describe your expectations from the course. You can list work-related and personal challenges, as well as what you would like to change about yourself. Completing this assignment in writing will increase your chances of successfully completing the course, and it will also be helpful to compare your expectations throughout the course and during preparation for the final assessment.

2. Change your daily routine to include course study. Find 1-2 hours for studying each day during the first week of training by literally blocking this time in your personal calendar. Write your hypothesis following the above example. Return to it after a week and update it with any necessary adjustments to your initial hypothesis.

3. Choose a time-tracking tool for the time spent on the course (ideally 2–4 Pomodoro sessions a day, each between 25–30 minutes). For example, in the Focus To Do mobile app, there is an Aisystant group you can join with the code: JNSYL. Create a project called "My Learning" in the tracker. Start using the ritual of turning on the tracker: at the moment you activate it, think about taking on the student role, with the result that by the end of a Pomodoro session, you should have a read section (pages), educational notes, and some project work products. Make an effort not to study without turning on the Pomodoro tracker and without observing the ritual! Write down your understanding of this important student ritual, and if necessary, refer to the post in the Aisystant club: https://systemsworld.club/t/forgetting-to-turn-on-the-pomodoro-tracker-why-it-is-important-and-how-to-establish-the-habit/11580

4. Register for Coda (for example, using this link: <https://dash.partnerstack.com/invite/47d92fe146214dec904c286c31f77015>) or another similar program if you want to model with a professional tool.

5. Organize your workspace so that nothing distracts you while studying the course. Ideally, choose a well-ventilated room, a comfortable chair, and a screen that allows for splitting into two parts: on one side, you study the course, and on the other, you take notes and model tables. Try to develop a routine: sit at your workspace, turn on the Pomodoro timer, prepare to take on the student role, and create diverse work products.

6. Explain to yourself that while studying the course, you're not just taking notes, but you are also recording your thoughts by creating educational notes. If you're not yet familiar with how to take notes (if you don't have your own knowledge base yet), we recommend writing down your thoughts in the "Questions for review and further study" cells (this subsection is found in each section before the "Homework" subsection). To do so, choose the most relevant question that relates to your thought, or record your thought in the cell with the last item "My notes on the studied section." By doing this, while gradually studying the course section, you'll gather answers to all questions, rather than writing them from scratch after reading the whole section.

Try to read the section over the first three days of the study week, and allocate the remaining time for modeling and completing assignments. Reserve the last day before the training with the instructor (or the 6th day of the week) as a backup. If you plan correctly, you can use this day to review the studied material, help fellow students, comment on drafts in the Aisystant club (not just from classmates), or formulate questions for the instructor.