---
order: 1
title: Description and Embodiment of a System
---

At Aisystant, the "Rational Work" course **teaches how to differentiate between the physical world and the mental space in speech or writing**. It also trains participants to connect abstract reasoning to the physical world. People cannot do without mental concepts as they facilitate communication. However, it’s crucial not to lose sight of physical-world objects behind words and symbols. "Losing touch with reality" is particularly discouraged in project activities, as it can hinder the creation of successful systems.

For example, a bankruptcy trustee might mistakenly believe that the goal of their work is to enter data into the liquidation registry. However, this entry is merely information confirming that all remaining assets have been distributed among creditors. These assets exist in the physical world and represent the trustee's goal and their system. The registry entry merely describes this system. Thus, in any activity, **one must not confuse the system with its description**. This approach (and thinking skill) requires practice. But first, it’s essential to clearly understand the concepts of "system embodiment" and "system description."

In systems thinking, the terms "**system embodiment**" and "**system description**" refer to different realms. "Embodiment" denotes the material and physical world, while "description" emphasizes that the discourse pertains to the mental space, which is not about the system's actual substance.

In this context, the concept of "system embodiment" might seem redundant since "system" already implies a physical object realized in reality. However, the word "embodiment" is deliberately used alongside "system" to contrast it with the phrase "system description." Often, when discussing "system embodiment," the "system description" is also addressed in parallel^[Therefore, you could simply use the term "system" without "embodiment." But if you want to highlight that you're considering the system and its description separately, you can use the terms "system embodiment" and "system description."].

An embodiment of the system can be an individual **system as a physical object**. For example, this "Blue Lagoon" cocktail in hand, or this specific pencil. These objects are literally present in the physical world; they exist in four dimensions (4D): length-width-height and time^[Note that this is not an abstract chair or car, which lack a connection to physical space and time.].

When we describe a system, we use terms that define its **characteristics, properties, actions, traits, behaviors, states**, and so on. For example, terms like color, price, height, weight, desires, and others. These words differ from words like "car," "table," or "watch," which denote physical objects.

To describe a system, one must be knowledgeable in certain **descriptive methods**^[More on this concept in Section 6.]. Each characteristic has its own worldviews, theories, and disciplines. If you need to describe the price of a car, you must understand pricing practices (descriptive methods), and if it's an enterprise for a shareholder, you can't do without understanding financial reporting under IFRS or US GAAP and a specific technology for preparing the corresponding financial documents (such as SAP).

System descriptions are inherently abstract. This concept is necessary to emphasize the substantive aspect of the discussed system. However, descriptions can be linked to the physical world by focusing on form. For this purpose, one needs to look at the information medium containing the system's description. Then, you'll be presented with **System Documentation**^[When we talk about the system description, we highlight the importance of content or essence that characterizes a system. When we talk about documentation, we focus on the fact that this content can be read, viewed, calculated, etc., on a specific medium. The more concepts, the more confusion. But by studying these concepts, order and clarity appear.].

The use of the term "System Documentation" means that the focus is primarily on the physical medium containing the system’s description^[When you hear or read the word "description," determine from the context whether it refers to the actual "description" or a "document with a description." Often, the word "description" can mean both.]. For example, a menu is System Documentation for a "cocktail." It contains the cocktail's description: ingredients, price, photo, etc.

**Documentation is often created using** **tools (technologies)** to implement a discipline used for system description. For example, "Financial Reporting under US GAAP" documentation is created using the IT system SAP.

Thus, understanding the difference between the concepts of embodiment, description, and system documentation, and identifying these concepts within your life, is an important thinking mastery. Without the skill of fluently distinguishing these concepts, further study of systems thinking concepts is impossible.