---
order: 3
title: "Documentation \u2013 Is It a System? Is a Working Product a System?"
---

Students frequently ask this question: "Documentation exists in the physical world, does that mean it's a system? After all, a menu, a book, and a passport need to be produced." This is a good question, and those who ask it are delving deeper.

Strangely enough, the answer to this question is related to attention. **The systems concept relies on** **techniques for managing** **attention**. Often, people learning the systems concept quickly jump from one project to another and lose sight of the fact that they start discussing one context and end with a third. Therefore, it is recommended to base their considerations on a not-too-complex activity that won't allow them to "lose touch with reality" in their reasoning.

If we are discussing the system of a "person," then the notions of "implementation, description, and system documentation" are tied to them. In this regard, a passport, a driver's license, and everything else in this project will constitute the System Documentation of the "person-citizen" system. But if you now wish to discuss a passport as a system, that's a different consideration and a different project. For instance, a project focused on producing the information carrier "passport." Notice how our **focus of attention** has shifted.

Not everyone immediately understands how the context changes in a conversation. In the passport creation project, the content, i.e., the description of the "person-citizen" system, is not as important. The information in the passport will be discussed in the first project, where the description of the "person-citizen" system is addressed. Consequently, the decision on how to describe the citizen is made in the first project.

In the second project, the main focus will be the carrier itself, not the information it contains. We noted in the previous section: "But when discussing the carriers of the description, we said nothing about the content of the description." The contents of the passport are determined in the project dealing with the person as a citizen, while the characteristics of the "passport" system are primarily connected to its protection against forgery or the number of pages.

Another example: The system engineer John Doe is responsible for the description of the car system. However, ensuring this content appears on an information carrier is the responsibility of the secretary, Jane Doe. Jane diligently records John's words and then prints them on A4 paper, or John himself will demonstrate the car description to colleagues on a computer. Notice that Jane isn't concerned with the content, i.e., the description of the "car" system.

Jane (or John, in his role as a speaker) is interested in the information carrier. There are other projects where, for example, Jane will also play the role of the engineer who creates the system—the information carrier. This might be an A4 sheet or several bound sheets with a system description. In place of an A4 sheet or presentation, there might be a passport, a book, a website, a digital twin (IT-system), etc. All these carriers need to be produced, and this work will involve specific engineering roles. For instance, a book is published by a printing house and other roles in publishing.

Therefore, a key thinking technique is the **conscious shifting of attention across various projects**^[In section 5, we'll discuss concepts such as systems levels and creation chains. These concepts will aid in working with multiple projects.]** There is content, and there is an information carrier on which this content lies. These concepts should not be confused. In one project, we discuss the car as a system embodiment, its description in the form of diverse characteristics (subjects of interest), and documentation—on paper, in presentations, on computers, etc. In another project, different people (or the same people, but in different roles) discuss how to beautifully create a brochure, website, or digital model. Of course, there is a connection between projects, and a systems-oriented individual understands it well due to established techniques in system concept. Thus, they can, if necessary, manage their attention.

Therefore, you also need to see the embodiment, description, and system documentation in any of your projects. But there might always be another project or activity where System Documentation is created from the perspective of its embodiment in the physical world. The content or system description on that carrier is determined in your project. Don’t get confused between different projects.

And **what is a "work product"?** A work product always exists in the physical world (4D). A system is also a work product created by a team. But not all work products are systems. Besides a system, a work product can be System Documentation. For example, a car is a work product of an Automotive corporation, but in the corporation's design bureau, the team creates a work product—a 3D model of the car. This three-dimensional model serves as the System Documentation for the car. In the car creation project, the 3D model (on a computer) is not considered on its own but as System Documentation for the car. This documentation, as a carrier, contains important descriptions of the car system.

Let's end by connecting another set of three concepts in the following sentence: **"A work product** in the form of **system documentation** is created using some **description method**." Try to grasp this sentence and discuss it in a group or draft something in the AISYSTANT club, presenting examples from a work project.