---
order: 6
title: 'Systems and Functions: Names Matter'
---

One of the common issues with understanding **systems thinking** is that people often get confused by system names and rely too heavily on common sense and the objective names of physical objects^[Refer to Section 2 of the course and try to understand the difference between a word, a physical object, and a system. After studying Sections 3–5, you might return to this and reread it. You will likely better understand the differences between different generations of the systems approach (from 1.0 to 3.0).]. For instance, a student is asked to name a system that generates energy for a house. He describes: "This system will be called a Tesla Model X electric car, which provides the primary function of generating electrical energy for my home." The student then explains that this is actually feasible. We were looking at an educational example, and thus the technology of connecting the Tesla to the home network was not our focus.

Notice that the student's description contains a typical mistake: the term "Tesla Model X electric car" is used as a physical object-module, whereas the required name should be a system name (functional name) based on the primary function. From a methodological perspective, it would be accurate to say: "The Tesla Model X electric car will act as a generator, which supplies electrical energy for the home." Thus, the functional name of the system is "generator," and its primary function is energy generation. Alternatively, one could refer to the Tesla Model X as a vehicle (also a functional name) that provides the primary function of movement or transportation (but not energy generation).

Let's further consider the **example of the physical object** **"stone"**. Here, unlike a vehicle, there is no functional name: it is difficult to attribute a function to a stone (unlike a hammer or a vehicle). The example with the stone aptly demonstrates that there are objective items not initially laden with any commonly shared functional meaning in culture.

Suppose you need to carry out two projects: in one, you need to fasten boards, and in the other, you are delivering a presentation outdoors with many papers on a table. When you describe (model) these projects, systems, and subsystems, in the first case, among other systems, you will consider the system or functional object "hammer"^[This name has become a culturally conditioned concept, just like the role name "driver."], and in the second case, a "paperweight." The words "hammer" and "paperweight" convey the functional behaviors of systems, clearly indicating their primary functions. This example shows that system names must always denote their primary functions explicitly.

Of course, in both projects, you might say there's a "stone" system, but that won't clarify much about what to do with it. However, if these are not your first projects and you have experience, the stone automatically transforms in your mind—in one project into a "hammer," and in the other, into a "paperweight." Hence, professionals often don't notice the need to name systems by their primary functions. They have gotten used to using a stone to drive nails or press down papers on a table.

The most common errors occur when "hammer" (a functional object) is written, but the main function is indicated as holding paper. Certainly, in everyday life, anything is possible, and a student might justify that the physical object hammer (in this case, the functional and modular meanings coincide) can hold paper. But what does the system with the role "hammer" do in a project involving an outdoor presentation to an audience? That's nonsensical! Or even better: what does a "paperweight" do in a project involving nailing boards together?

Now, you understand that the word "hammer" can be used as a functional system name and as a physical object (by analogy with the stone). Typically, a person intuitively understands from context what is meant in a specific everyday situation. But in projects, it is not as straightforward, especially if it is a new project. You must be aware that in one project, you have the system "hammer" (as a functional object, or if a hammer is too complex, think of "nailer"), and this role can be performed by a stone, a microscope, etc. Consequently, its primary function is to drive nails. In another project, you have the role "paperweight," which can be performed by a stone or other physical objects—a hammer or a microscope. But the main function is to hold down paper.

**Systems thinking** **is counterintuitive**, and this example illustrates that. There are many such non-obvious aspects in systems thinking, but they can be understood by mastering the necessary systems techniques. Then you will indeed see the world differently and be able to improve it, first for yourself and then for others.