---
title: Intelligence Stack and Self-Development Stack
---

Let's imagine that you are tasked with understanding roadwork, or the banking sector, or IT. It's quite likely that you'll approach this problem based on your practical experience. But if you are an IT specialist, you probably don't understand roads, and vice versa, a road specialist probably doesn't understand IT. Do you not know banking terminology? Then you can't even imagine where to start. But if you have systems thinking, then **your intelligence will pay attention to those objects that exist in any field of activity**: roles, methods (practices)^[The terms "method" and "practice" will be used as synonyms in the course. Although note that in some cases the word "practice" means an activity opposed to theory.], work artifacts, systems, architecture, and other systemic concepts.

**Intelligence (thought mastery) helps deal with new problems, and therefore does not develop through applied sciences**^[Intelligence won't develop by studying operational management, accounting, or swimming techniques. Of course, the more you study and the more new problems you solve, the more likely your intelligence develops. But beyond practical activity, theory is necessary. So the development of intelligence depends on both theory and practical activity.]. Intelligence as an ability is demonstrated when one needs to deal with something new: an unknown work problem, a personal life situation, or learning a new theory and mastering new tools. And even if it were possible to invent applied theories for all new issues, an individual couldn't know them all. Intelligence helps to study necessary theories, and strong intelligence allows one to do so much more quickly.

Each person has innate intelligence, which predominantly develops through practice: children learn to cope with new problems in their lives - crawling, walking, running, speaking, managing attention, etc. As one matures, knowledge becomes important for developing intelligence. And it's not just any disciplines, but mental theories that help with new problems. This is how they differ from applied disciplines, which solve specific classes of tasks. We call such mental disciplines **transdisciplines**. A transdiscipline sets concepts and principles for multiple disciplines or areas of knowledge^[For example, the transdiscipline of mathematics provides the mathematical language for other disciplines - physics, chemistry, etc. A transdiscipline is also a discipline, but often it's important for us to emphasize the relationship between different theories as "transdiscipline - discipline." Other classifications of knowledge exist, such as "fundamental and humanitarian."].

The complete **list of transdisciplines in the Intelligence Stack** **includes**^[The order of the transdisciplines in the intelligence stack is approximate and utilizing explanations requires knowledge from transdisciplines lower in the stack. However, the intelligence stack is a knowledge grid in which various transdisciplines and explanations are intertwined.]: 1. Systems Engineering 2. Methodology 3. Rhetoric 4. Ethics 5. Aesthetics 6. Research 7. Rationality 8. Logic 9. Algorithmics 10. Ontology 11. Theory of Concepts 12. Physics 13. Mathematics 14. Semantics 15. Composure 16. Conceptualization.

**The Intelligence Stack literally stitches the intellect with specific concepts, principles, and thinking techniques** that help us think abstractly, adequately, consciously, rationally, and systematically. It allows for developing thinking models, working with data, and acting in the real world. With the help of the intelligence stack, it becomes easier and faster to understand new fields of work and life, to focus and reason without crude errors, and to create successful systems.

In the School of Systems Management, besides consciously developing intelligence through the intelligence stack, they teach **applied practices for the role of a learner**. The driver or manager role has its own set of applied theories they master. In the same way, applied practices are highlighted for the learner role, which are **self-development practices**.

The course "Self-Development Practices" collects such universal practices that you can use throughout your life (as with arithmetic): investing and accounting for time; systematic slow reading; thinking by writing; thinking by speaking; leisure organization; environment formation; strategizing; planning.

Conscious mastery of self-development practices is called **new or second literacy.** We consider these practices the personal practices of a cultured person of the 21st century, who consciously learns throughout life. The course "Self-Development Practices" allows understanding what "learning to learn" is and how the aforementioned practices form mastery of self-development or the ability to independently and infinitely develop. If you are well-versed in learner practices, they, alongside intelligence, will also help you learn faster.