---
title: What does it mean to "apply systems thinking"?
---

Applying systems thinking means that you skillfully operate within the **concepts of the Intelligence Stack** in your activities. Mastery of the minimal set of concepts implies not just knowing each concept, but also the ability to link them together and apply them to your projects. In the course, you study the concepts of systems thinking, linking them not only with each other but also with the concepts of entrepreneurship, engineering, and management.

If a person says that they will apply a systems approach, it means they will use the minimal set of systems thinking concepts in their activities. If a person does not master these concepts, they may be logical, systematic, professional, and anything else, but not systems-focused.

**A professional with a substantial track record does not necessarily possess systems thinking**. Although they may solve any complex tasks in their field. We consider a person systems-focused if they have consciously^ [Meaning attention is focused on the minimal set of concepts and identifying these concepts in work projects.] studied and applied the concepts of modern systems methodology in work and personal projects^ [However, there is no 100% guarantee that all these projects will be successful. Nonetheless, all else being equal, the likelihood of success with systems thinking increases.].

A systems-focused person must have a set **“type engine”** — the ability to track the types of concepts used. For example, an average adult would notice a mismatch of types in the following enumeration: "I visited New York, London, and China." That is, the type "city" is used alongside the type "country," which is incorrect from a systems thinking point of view, and it's better not to mix types. Similarly, a systems-focused person tracks mismatches in statements like: "At the meeting were Ivan, Peter, and the contractor's accountant" or "I perform the roles of marketer, financier, and department manager." That is, the type "performer (agent)" is used alongside the type "role," and in the second example, the type "role" is used alongside the type "title," which is incorrect, and it's better not to mix types in work activities^ [If these examples are unclear to you, take the "Rational Work" course.].

The type engine^ [Like ontological mastery, which is embedded in the brain and body. The error signal in types is noticed at the level of body sensations, hence the term ontological buzz. Besides the buzz, it is recommended to pay attention to other bodily sensations in intellectual activities, such as cognitive resonance and creative click. Read more about this in the club post: [https://systemsworld.club/t/drebezg-rezonans-shhelchok/9272](https://systemsworld.club/t/drebezg-rezonans-shhelchok/9272){target="_blank"}]
allows for the swift application of systems thinking without confusion in descriptions (modeling) and communication in complex projects. That is, **system concept types such as system, role, title, process, etc., shouldn't be mixed up**. The setup for the type engine takes place in the "Rational Work" course, although some students had it installed in college and quickly adapt to the new conceptual base.