---
title: Classical Systems Approach 1.0
---

The foundation of the systems approach is the notion of "system." **Through systems, the practitioner thinks about the world of objects or** **things**^[Do not confuse the physical world with the mental space. A human is an object of the physical world, while the concept of "age" is an abstract object.]. Here, an analogy can be drawn with physics, when the notion of "physical body" is introduced. It implies a material object having mass, shape, volume. In physics, all reasoning and laws are tied to the physical body, and when physical laws are applied in practice, the "physical body" is replaced by a corresponding material object: road, chair, rocket, or engine piston.

The same occurs with the notion of "system." Every professional works with their systems. For one, a system might be a house, or a computer program, or an artificial intelligence; for another -- a child ready for adult life, and for a third -- a grown tree or grove. Anyone, consciously or unconsciously, creates systems. **A systems practitioner does this consciously, relying on various systems methodologies.**

In specific projects, "systems" are distinguished from the physical world by the attention of a person or team. Systems thinking is the ability to identify systems, describe, and create them^[By involving professionals in applied methods.], as well as performing certain actions with them. **The systems approach offers methodologies based on the notion of "system" ** to develop systems thinking. There are several generations of the systems approach, each containing different methodologies^[Although all systems methodologies are based on the notion of "system," they may use their unique set of concepts. Besides differences in concept sets, methodologies are also distinguished by generations of the systems approach.]. All methodologies of each generation are united by the presence of the "system" concept.

In **the first version of the systems approach**^[There are several methodologies, whose founders include Alexander Bogdanov, Edward Bono, Peter Drucker, Alfred Chandler, and others.], formulated by **Ludwig von Bertalanffy**, systems are viewed as objects representing a particular class. One can consider the system "clock." Note that it's an ideal (although we imagine that the clock is physical), rather than a specific physical object to point at. We are not talking about a wristwatch or a clock on a space station. Objective consideration of systems implied that systems are objects and were discussed independently of subjects. Therefore, in the systems approach 1.0, one can discuss just clocks, tables, or cars, and find different properties in these systems -- **integrity, emergent properties, embedding.** The classical approach predominantly considers these three properties of any system.

A person cannot simultaneously consider the entire world, as the brain lacks computational power. Attention highlights what's important from reality, but strives not to lose connection of this important element with the world as a whole, meaning not losing context. The concept of "system" allows managing attention; hence, it is sometimes said that **systems thinking is the ability to manage attention.**

The property of "**integrity**" implies that a system has a boundary, and the connection between the parts of the system is much stronger than with other objects of physical reality. This property helps highlight systems with one's attention. In simple objects like a table or car, boundary issues do not arise, but when considering complex systems (such as an airport or university), finding boundaries is not straightforward. It's not easy to understand what a security system on waters, a pass issuance system, or a heating system is. We will discuss complex systems in more detail later.

The second important property of a system is **emergent properties**. In English, "emerge" means appearance. Emergent properties mean that a system has gained a new property (or function) that was not present in any of its individual parts. For example, an engine, chassis, and cabin together form a car system, which gains the function of moving with a passenger. None of the car's parts have that function. It appears when all the subsystems are united. Any system possesses the property of emergent properties, and if it lacks such a function, it's not a system.

The third property of classical systems is **embedding**^[We will talk about the embedding of physical systems into each other. This embedding relationship between physical objects as "part-whole" is different from the relationships "class-class member" and "superclass-subclass."]. Embedding can be visualized as a Matryoshka doll: one system enters another, which will be a supersystem for it. The property of embedding means that any system itself is a supersystem for some subsystems and also enters a larger supersystem. If we say we have a system, then it automatically has subsystems and a supersystem.

All three properties of the classical systems approach help **highlight necessary objects from the physical world**, maintain attention on the system itself, and when necessary examine its structure (subsystems), as well as not lose connection of the system with the physical world (supersystem).

**Let's consider an example -- the system "clock."** First of all, one can always imagine this system in the physical world. The clock possesses the property of integrity, it has a boundary. The clock has an emergent property, meaning it has a function -- to show time. This function only appears when all clock parts are assembled together. None of the clock parts have such a property on their own. Embedding is manifested in the fact that each clock element is part of the entire system. Moreover, the dial itself also has subsystems. Each subsystem will have its properties of integrity, emergent properties, embedding.

Thus, the classical systems approach sets a certain type of thinking or worldview through the properties of a system, and this mental technique will be used in subsequent generations of the systems approach 2.0 and 3.0.