---
order: 7
title: Executor of a Role, Role, Function, and System Names
---

# Executor of a Role, Role, Function, and System Names

In the previous section, we briefly discussed the distinction between a physical object, a functional object, and functional (or role) behavior. For example, a physical object is a microscope^[When we mention "microscope," we primarily refer to the role "microscope." However, we also use it as a name for the physical item that, in everyday language, is called a microscope. Context helps us differentiate these meanings. It's great if you've grasped this duality, similar to the case with a hammer. A systems-oriented person understands this difference well. It's best to start with a stone.], or a stone. These objects can assume different roles and perform various functions assigned to them. In our example, the functional object or role is a "nail-driver." Culturally, this role is commonly called a "hammer." The function or the functional or role behavior is the act of driving nails.

As we've mentioned earlier, each role is associated with culturally-conditioned behavior and a corresponding culturally established name^[Or conditioned by cultural norms and rules, i.e., accepted in culture, norms of behavior, usage, etc.]. Everyone understands what the role "hammer" entails and its function of driving nails. The physical item that can become a hammer^[That is, play the role of a hammer. Note that similar reasoning applies if we were discussing the role of a manager being played by John Doe or Jane Doe.], can vary.

This mindset, where things are named for their primary function^[Or their role behavior.], significantly economizes our brain's computational power. We first consider actions (behavior and other activities) and then identify physical objects capable of performing these actions. This cultural conditioning facilitates faster agreements^[Although not all established item names adhere to this principle. Sometimes ancient names have obscure origins and often indicate form or something else rather than role/function. As a matter of etiquette, in system development, it's correct to look for the role—an indication of function or actions of the role in the name rather than a physical object representing the system.]: we don't need to call a functional object a "person who drives a car." Instead, we can efficiently label it with the shorter role name—driver^[Just like earlier, it was suggested not to call a functional object a "nail-driver," but to use the role name "hammer."]. 

Here's a brief excerpt from what's written about this topic in the textbook "Systems Thinking":

"Systems are primarily viewed as functional (role) objects at the moment they fulfill their function, meaning they are ready to work. They then provide value to those who need that function. For example, an airplane as a system is principally a role or functional object that flies, transporting passengers and cargo through the air. The most common purpose or function of an airplane is to enable flight. This functionality is directly reflected in its name 'airplane.'

The main purpose of a pump is to pump. That's why the cultural name of this product developed as it did. Manufacturers aim to please customers by naming products in a way that quickly conveys their value. Customers consciously (or intuitively) understand the desired function and get to know the products, starting with their functional names^[Products may have other names, such as people. Planes carry the names of great people.]. However, a system named by the manufacturer as 'Pump NV-23'^[Here, we refer to the physical object "Pump NV-23," which can perform the function of pumping and play the role of a pump.], may serve a different function for a customer. For example, it might be used to circulate antifreeze. In this instance, the customer's requirement for function has changed—they need a functional object, an antifreeze circulator. Will 'Pump NV-23' suit the role of 'antifreeze circulator'? Perhaps it will.

Therefore, a pump might be named an 'antifreeze circulator in the second cooling loop' if its role is to circulate antifreeze in the second loop. The manufacturer will sell the physical object "Pump NV-23,"^[This product was conceived to fulfill the role of a pump, to perform the function of pumping.], but the buyer might use it for a different role (circulator). This is commonplace. Without the usage context, it is simply a pump, a structural object with no environment. In the context of role play, it's a role object, 'antifreeze circulator in the second cooling loop.' Outside the context of using engineering capabilities, Masha is merely Masha—she can be many things. Like a microscope: it can show small objects, crack nuts, drive nails, or be used as a paperweight. Similarly, Masha is capable of many things. But when she performs the function of an engineer, a role behavior, she will be called 'engineer.' And that's normal."

Thus, it's important to name systems by their primary function^[Note that in established item names, this rule might not apply, but in your projects, you'll save a lot of time if you follow it. It will allow for quicker agreements and clearer understanding of clients' requests and your product. More on naming systems can be found in section 5 of the online course "Systems Thinking."], meaning by the roles assigned to them. These roles determine the function. Sometimes the function is apparent, but naming the role isn't straightforward^[Quickly, you understand you need the "nail-driving" function, so the role is nail-driver. But it takes activity awareness to name the role 'hammer.' While the term 'hammer' is generally understood, naming project roles in an aircraft factory or naming airplane subsystems requires more effort.]. A broad understanding of activities helps find role names easily.

When we name a system as a "microscope," we primarily refer to its capacity to "view small objects" when fully manufactured and operational. If we anticipated using it to drive nails, we'd state that the physical object "Microscope MP-2" would play the role of "hammer," performing the function of hammering or pounding.

Conversely, should someone declare a person as a system, there's often little immediate information about their function in the environment. A person is a multifunctional object capable of numerous actions and can be viewed as a biological body (as seen by medicine, for instance). We mentioned in the previous section that a person can play various roles. Therefore, role behaviors or functions of people always require separate and specific examination. However, the thinking about people in roles and microscopes-in-roles is structured similarly!^[Systems thinking begins with viewing systems as role (functional) objects that exhibit behavior in their environment. We first look at the function performed or required, the role played, or the assignment. Only then do we consider the structure or physical object that will fulfill the identified role.]

If you find these concepts challenging to grasp, or you don't understand the importance of such distinctions for project work, it indicates gaps in your ontological knowledge. To master systems thinking, you need to have a type classifier/cognitive type machine^[This is a capability to track the types of concepts applied and to avoid confusing, for example, role and executor, system and process, function and structure, etc.]. If you're struggling with this, we recommend taking the course "Rational Work."