---
order: 2
title: Roles and Executors
---

# Roles and Performers

The term "role" was initially used to separate an individual from their actions (role behavior). Today, we discuss agents^[Agents can be people or other entities with intentions, strategies, and plans for achieving their goals. For example, organizations of people with their tools and computers, and even certain other entities that we have yet to identify. They can also play different roles in various projects and interact with other agents.] with intentions, which means not only humans but also inanimate physical objects. There are many agents and objects, but far fewer roles.

Agents relate to certain concepts such as dissatisfaction, intentions, qualifications, and so on, while roles played by agents involve others, like methods, subjects of interest, preferences, and more. However, we can also say that a "hammer's" role can be executed by a "stone." There are certain distinctions: agents have specific intentions and thus must themselves decide to take on a role^[Or do this through interaction with another agent, meaning through a leadership method where they are placed in a role by another agent.], while a stone "is placed" in a role only by an agent. Moving forward, we will primarily consider the more complex cases where the role performer is an agent^[When it comes to a physical inanimate object (non-agent), this is standard engineering.].

Even though all people and other agents are different, most actions are similar, so they can be described and formalized as a method. Moreover, these actions can be improved and, most importantly, taught to others. For example, surgeons are taught in the same way everywhere. In some instances, the role of a surgeon is no longer performed by a human but by artificial intelligence.

Ordinary individuals in a business rarely use the theatrical metaphor. Most view their colleagues as performers, recognizing them by first and last names. However, a system constructor understands not only this but also the roles played by each team member. This is an important system skill (technique) that should become a habit for you. Read the dialogue shown in the illustration^[It is taken from the textbook "Systems Thinking."]. 

In a project, you should recognize both project roles and the names of the performers. Often, several people can perform the same roles, and one person can fulfill multiple roles. Though not common, one person can play certain roles in one project and different ones in another. In each role, a person operates according to a specific method.

A person might not realize they are acting according to a certain method if not consciously studied at a university^[It is unlikely a surgeon could work in the field without deliberate study of theory and practice at a university, but many other roles and methods are not consciously studied this way.]. Within many teams, self-taught individuals can always be found^[Most actions in life are performed without understanding the concept of "method." For example, many manage personal finances or swim without having specifically studied it. However, professional endeavors cannot be achieved without deliberately learning modern methods. Without intelligence, one cannot navigate numerous applied methods and master them quicker than others.]. However, good self-taught individuals are few and far between, with far more talented or ordinary people who have been able to develop their abilities through conscious learning of methods and transdisciplines from the intellect stack.

A role performer is characterized by their qualification in a specific mastery. For example, how skilled a person is as a surgeon. This qualification depends at least on the modernity of the studied theory (discipline) and the number of practical hours spent working in the role. Therefore, both modern theory and practical work using the best technologies (tools) are necessary.