---
order: 8
title: 'Role Executors: Agent and Their Intention, Strategy, and Plans'
---

# Role Executors: Agent and Their Intention, Strategy, and Plans

When dealing with roles, it's important not to overlook the executor of the role as an agent. An agent can be a person or another subject (such as an organization, teams, or soon AI) who intends to take actions to eliminate dissatisfaction. A person is a broad concept^[For example, when talking about a person, one could also consider the organism and its structure. However, we won't delve into that, so the concept of "agent" helps narrow down the broad concept of "person."]. We need to focus on the dissatisfactions and desires of a person, which drive their actions.

When we talk about a person, there's a risk of veering into psychological terminology, which is less formal and not suitable for systems modeling. Therefore, to discuss the human-agent, the concept of "intention" is introduced^[Do not confuse: intention refers to the human-agent or executor, while preference relates to the role. So it is correct to say, "the person intends to take action," and "the person in the role has a role interest," or "the role has a role interest." From a systems thinking perspective, it is incorrect to say that 'a role has an intention' and that 'a person pursues a role interest.']. Intention allows us to discuss not the role, but its executor. Thus, "preference" relates to the role, while "intention" relates to the executor of the role.

In the textbook "Systems Self-Development," a scheme connecting psychology and systems thinking was introduced. Here, we'll refine it slightly. Feeling dissatisfaction, a human-agent intends to step into a role to address this dissatisfaction through action and method. Simultaneously, the agent in the role participates in creating a system using the given method.

The agent acts according to a role and thereby pursues a role interest (preference) in the system. However, the agent can also intentionally switch between roles, and accordingly, we can observe changes in preferences. For example, we might expect a person to play one role and pursue the corresponding role interests, but instead, they switch roles and pursue a different role interest, possibly in a completely different system. To manage an agent's intentions, specific practices are required^[Essentially, this involves creating a system that must perform a certain role. But this system is made not of iron, plastic, and other materials, but of 'flesh and blood.' If an inanimate system is created exclusively by engineering methods, for a biological system, that is not enough. If we need to work at the level of body parts, we need to involve medics, at the genetic level – neurobiologists, and if at the whole organism level – trainers (for example, teaching swimming), instructors (teaching professional methods), and systems leaders (helping to assume the correct roles).], primarily system leadership. System leadership is a method for placing the executor-agent into a project role. An inanimate physical object is placed into a role using regular engineering methods^[For example, mechanical engineering "places" a specific "Engine M-1245" into the role of a car motor.], whereas for an agent, system leadership takes the place of these methods.

The concept of "intention" is first and foremost necessary to identify specific individuals related to your system and project. These specific individuals need to be linked to project roles, or conversely, project roles should be associated with specific individuals.

Often, there are many people around you, but you cannot determine their intentions, and therefore do not know if they are stakeholders^[A person might be playing a different role in the discussion process, one that doesn’t relate to your project. In this moment, the actor-person's intention is to play a different role than what you expect, completely different. At this moment, you do not have an interested role; rather, there is no actor in that role. This is where you’ll need system leadership if you wish to change the intention of the actor-person.]. Sometimes, conversely, there is nobody around you or you are working with a small team, yet there are people somewhere who want something from you or your project. By identifying these people's intentions, you can better understand if they are stakeholders and what roles they play concerning your system.

Thus, when working with project roles, it is necessary to know all the executors and their intentions. If the intentions of the executors are not connected to your project's roles, then you have either chosen the wrong executors or you will need to alter their intentions.