---
order: 1
title: Role as a Model of Thinking
---

# Role as a Model of Thinking

An ordinary person acts intuitively or based on experience, and their role-based behavior is dictated by the theory that has been ingrained in them^[A person may unknowingly absorb theory from interactions with others. Often, people learn unconsciously, absorbing information from their environment or imitating someone they consider an authority.]. We often say that a person acts according to their worldviews.

A worldview can be shaped by a scientific theory or an old wife's tale. Scientific theories and disciplines better describe role-based behavior, but nonscientific worldviews are simpler and, therefore, more in demand by the majority. When we speak about the worldview of an engineer, we primarily mean the engineering methods that they learned in higher education and further developed in their professional work.

An intentional way of studying professional roles involves establishing appropriate practices. It can be said that a person instills discipline into their mind and masters the skill of handling tools (technologies). For example, a driver learns traffic laws and practices driving a vehicle. The rules are the theory (discipline), and the vehicle is the tool. Afterward, one can say that the person has mastered the role of a driver, meaning they have studied the practice of "driving a vehicle," through which they obtain a work artifact—transporting physical objects (people, goods).

This method of thinking is applicable to all actions that a person performs not only at work but also in personal life. For instance, roles such as son, caregiver, student, motivator, dish-washer, room cleaner, subway passenger, etc., should be considered similarly to professional roles, that is, focusing on methods (theories, technologies, and work artifacts).

Role consideration allows us to pay special or formal attention^[This means highlighting the theory with its concepts, principles, etc.] to our behavior. For instance, when learning to swim, we understand that we need to master the technique (method, practice) of freestyle stroke, and then we can professionally perform the role of a freestyle swimmer^[Note that the text deliberately uses the concepts of "role," "method," and "role-based behavior" together. You need to train your brain to distinguish these concepts. Just as you distinguish other classes of concepts, for instance, you do not confuse furniture and colors. You can discuss chairs, tables, and wardrobes separately from their colors, sizes, etc. Such a type classifier/cognitive type machine is built in a person over a lifetime, though specialized training can significantly accelerate this process. Both time spent and quality of training (which reduces the required time) are important. Read more about the type classifier/cognitive type machine in the textbook on "Systems Thinking."]. In critical situations of child-rearing, one shouldn't follow poor automatized habits and become nervous, but instead recall the role of a caregiver and look for a good method to apply in communication with the child.

When you start to study, it is helpful to understand what student practices exist or what it means to actually learn. The concept of "role" lets us transform unconscious actions into conscious ones, allowing us to focus on formal objects of attention (method, system, other roles, etc.). Usually, people learn unconsciously; they cannot name formal learning methods (practices) or describe how or through which practices they learn.

Think about which methods you use to learn. For example, why did the first homework assignment in the course involve systematic reading and controlling information consumption, the Pomodoro Technique, and time investment, along with thinking through writing and thinking by speaking? These were some of the key practices of the role of a student^[All of them are detailed in the "Self-Development Practices" course.].

However, there are times when we do not need to be entirely conscious or take a formal approach to our actions. Behavioral automatisms save attention, and therefore, we perform certain roles unconsciously. For instance, when we brush our teeth or take a shower. If we do not want to change our behavior or the world around us, we don't need to trouble ourselves with role consideration. Yet, if it's necessary to establish or modify the process of brushing teeth, then we should consciously identify the role of tooth cleaner and discover the best method for oral hygiene. We then explore and master the tools—like a toothbrush, toothpaste, mouthwash, or irrigator. Finally, we refine this role-based behavior to an automatism.

Changing one's behavior is literally changing one's thinking (mastering new techniques), and to do this, we need to pay attention to our actions. The concept of "role" as a thinking model provides an opportunity to do this, and thinking mastery helps find and swiftly establish the required applied practice.

It's important to understand that behind every project role stands a method (practice) and a work artifact. By naming a person by their role, we simultaneously define an entire class of practices through which the role creates work artifacts. For example, for the role of a swimmer, we immediately determine a possible class of practices—freestyle, breaststroke, butterfly, and when speaking of an entrepreneur, we have in mind other practices—Business Model Canvas, Lean Startup, Lean Canvas, and others. Hopefully, you already understand that each role has a large number of practices: unique to surgeons, operational managers, financiers, engineers, architects, educators, etc.

In ancient times, masters simply did their work and rarely pondered the strict formalization of their actions. Yet, unique historical objects were created. However, the complexity of the modern world is entirely different, and due to the formalization of work methods, a larger number of people can become masters of their craft, and humanity, on the whole, can create a significant number of successful systems.

Without role consideration, one cannot cope with the complexity of the current stage of human development. A modern person will always be in demand if they continually learn and timely retrain. Systems thinking is a way to formalize the actions and behavior of numerous interested people. The concept of "role" is the main concept for such formalization.