---
order: 8
title: 'Role Executors: Agent and Their Intentions, Strategy, and Plans'
---

# Role Executors: The Agent and Their Intentions, Strategy, and Plans

When dealing with roles, it's crucial not to overlook the role executor as an agent. An agent is a person or another entity (like an organization, team, or soon AI) who intends to take action to address dissatisfaction. The concept of a person is too broad^[For instance, when discussing a person, one might also consider the organism and its structure. But we won't do that here, which is why the term "agent" helps narrow down the broad idea of "person."]. We need to focus on the dissatisfactions and desires of individuals, which drive their actions.

When discussing a person, there is a risk of veering into psychological terminology, which is less formal and not suitable for systems modeling. Therefore, to discuss the person-agent, we introduce the concept of "intention"^[Do not confuse: intention pertains to the person-agent or executor, while preference pertains to the role. Therefore, it's correct to say: "a person intends to act" and "a person in a role has a role interest" or "a role has a role interest." From a systems thinking perspective, it is incorrect to say that "a role has an intention" and that "a person pursues a role interest."]. Intention allows us to discuss not the role itself, but its executor. That is, "preference" is related to the role, and "intention" to the role's executor.

In the textbook "Systems Self-Development," a schema connecting psychology and systems thinking was introduced. Here, we will refine it a bit. Feeling dissatisfied, a person-agent intends to take on a role to eliminate this dissatisfaction through action by a method. Simultaneously, the agent in the role uses this method to contribute to the creation of some system.

The agent acts according to the role and thus pursues a role interest (preference) concerning the system. However, the agent can also intentionally switch between roles, and correspondingly, we may observe a change in preferences. For example, we expect a person to perform a role and pursue corresponding role interests, but they may switch roles and pursue a different role interest, potentially in a completely different system. To work with the agent's intentions, specific practices are required^[Essentially, this involves crafting a system that must fulfill a specific role. But this system is not made of metal, plastic, or other materials; it is "flesh and blood." While an inanimate system is created solely by engineering methods, a biological system requires more. If it's necessary to work at the level of body parts, medical professionals are needed; at the genetic level, neurobiologists; and at the organism level, trainers (e.g., swim instructors), teachers (training in professional methods), and systemic leaders (helping adopt the correct roles).]. Foremost among these is systems leadership. Systems leadership is a method of placing the agent-executor in a project role. An inanimate physical object is assigned a role through conventional engineering methods^[For example, mechanical engineering "assigns" a specific "M-1245 Engine" as the motor for a vehicle.], but for human agents, systems leadership replaces these methods.

The concept of "intention" is primarily necessary to identify specific individuals who have some relation to your system and project. For these specific people, you need to identify project roles, or conversely, link project roles to specific individuals.

Often, there are many people around you whose intentions you don't understand, and consequently, you don't know if they are stakeholders^[A person may play a different role in the process of discussion—one not related to your project. At that time, the actor-person's intention is to play a role different from the one you expect, a completely different one. Thus, at that moment, you don't have an interested role, or rather, you don't have an actor in the given role. Systems leadership is necessary here if you want to change the actor-person's intention.]. Sometimes, conversely, no one is around or you're working with a small team, but somewhere there are people who want something from you or your project. By identifying these people's intentions, you can better understand whether they are stakeholders and what roles they play in relation to your system.

Thus, when working with project roles, it’s essential to know all executors and their intentions. If executors' intentions are not related to your project's roles, then you have either chosen the wrong executors, or you'll need to change their intentions.