---
order: 5
title: Subject of Interest, Role Interest, or Preference
---

# Subject of Interest, Role Interest, or Preference

Let's explore in detail the concepts of "subject of interest" and "role interest" (preference). It's important to remember that when we talk about a project role (with the executor being an agent), it implies that this role has a specific subject of interest within the system, meaning something in it is of interest. Ultimately, systems thinking focuses more on the system characteristics necessary for the roles rather than the roles themselves. Through roles and their methods, one can reach the system's characteristics. We can say that a role is concerned with certain important subjects of interest within a system.

A subject of interest is an important characteristic of the system, and it's crucial to use this cognitive tool to distinguish between "systems" and "subjects of interest" during discussions. For example, a car system can be characterized by cost, speed, color, design, and much more [ ^1 ]. The cost of a car interests the buyer, so we can say that their subject of interest is the price (or cost). Note that the subject of interest in the system belongs to the role, not the agent (executor of the role). John Doe or Andrew Smith as buyers [ ^2 ] share the same subject of interest regarding the car's price.

However, do not confuse subjects of interest with system functions. Functions of different systems can be unique, whereas subjects of interest are often common across many systems. For example, a chair and a table have different functions, but the subjects of interest for these systems may be called the same: cost, size, stability, reliability, etc.

It's important to note that important system characteristics themselves—meaning their selection and realization—are a separate subject of interest for the role of an architect. Thus, for system architects, system characteristics are necessary. For instance, architects are concerned with subjects of interest such as reliability, safety, durability, scalability, availability, continuity, performance, configurability, expandability, reusability, localization, maintainability, portability, upgradeability, and so on.

The architect works with these subjects of interest (highlighting the most important from them), referred to as architectural characteristics, resulting in a constructive solution [ ^3 ] or a proposal for dividing the system into specific modules [ ^4 ]. The architectural solution helps to divide the system into modules. You aren't required to know architectural methods or work as an architect, but you should understand the essence of architectural work from a systems thinking perspective: what an architect does and what their work artifact is. In the same way, you might not know how to perform plumbing work in an apartment, but you're well-informed about a plumber's job, and you can even assign tasks and accept their work.

Multiple roles can share the same subject of interest. However, the role interest among these roles can differ. Therefore, another concept is introduced—preference [ ^5 ]. It indicates what a specific role wants concerning the subject of interest. Cost is not only a concern for the buyer but also for the seller, yet their preferences or role interests are different. The subject of interest remains the same, but the buyer prefers a lower price, and the seller prefers a higher one. Consequently, role preferences (or role interest) differ while the subject of interest is the same.

When identifying a project role, it is implied that there are specific subjects of interest. The names of project roles in culture are tied to subjects of interest in the system. A manager's subject of interest in an "enterprise" system might be deadlines, finances, budget, etc. Therefore, the manager is not interested in the entire enterprise but only in its specific characteristics. Different roles focus on various system characteristics [ ^6 ]. Moreover, you can imagine the interest as a variable and the preference as its specific value.

Being aware of subjects of interest, like knowing the names of project roles, is part of general awareness. Most people have a good functional awareness in the medical field. Some have it more developed than in entrepreneurship, engineering, and management. You know there are many different doctors, and you might even guess their subjects of interest. For example, you can distinguish a therapist from a pediatrician and understand what interests an otolaryngologist and a dentist. However, you're unlikely to name at least three roles within the class "engineers" or "managers" unless you've specifically studied them. Therefore, after learning systems thinking, it is essential to study systems management and systems engineering [ ^7 ].

A successful constructor needs to understand roles and interests in project activities much better than in any particular field. Our educational program is precisely aimed at developing general awareness.

[ ^1 ]: The international standard ISO 42010 provides an approximate list of subjects of interest: functionality, achievability, usage, purpose of the system, system capabilities, system properties, known constraints, structure, behavior, effectiveness/performance, resource usage, reliability, protection, integrity and information security, complexity, ability to evolve, openness, execution parallelism, autonomy, cost, schedule, quality of service, flexibility in use, flexibility in development, modifiability, modularity, management, inter-process communication, deadlock, state changes, subsystem integration, data availability, privacy, legal compliance, justification, organizational goals and strategies, user experience, maintainability, affordability, and ease of decommissioning and disposal. As you understand, this list is not exhaustive; different systems may have other characteristics (subjects of interest).
[ ^2 ]: Role executors can vary, but this cognitive tool allows identifying their common ground, specifically their interest in the car's price.
[ ^3 ]: The structure of a system as a "transparent box."
[ ^4 ]: More information about this can be found in the course "Systems Engineering."
[ ^5 ]: For example, an architect offers different options for accounting for these preferences based on the system's modularity decisions: the more/less a specific subject of interest, the better. This becomes a matter of negotiation and compromise in satisfying the interests of project roles. Preference is often used as a synonym for "role interest."
[ ^6 ]: The manager of practices is interested in the methods and practices used in the enterprise. For instance, this role would be interested in which IT program is used in the project bureau of an automotive corporation: does it allow drawing models in 2D or 3D?
[ ^7 ]: These are broad transdisciplines that benefit any specialist seeking to strengthen their intellect.