---
order: 1
title: Preparation for Learning
---

# Preparing for Learning

Before starting the project of learning in the course, allocate 30 minutes to organize your work for the first week. After testing, you can make changes in the second and subsequent weeks.

This task is particularly important for those who haven't undergone extensive training in a long time. Consider studying the course as a regular mental exercise in which your thinking is reprogrammed. Therefore, pay close attention to the assignments, and it is preferable to describe your thoughts (hypotheses) on each task in a few words—this will help you start thinking through writing. For example, you can respond to the second task as follows: "I want to study the course in the morning before work for 30 minutes, then allocate 1 hour during the day, and another 30 minutes in the evening. To achieve this, I'll start shifting my evening wakefulness to morning study time: I'll begin going to bed 15 minutes earlier and, by waking up earlier, start studying for at least 15 minutes a day, gradually increasing it to 30 minutes."

1. Describe your expectations from the course. You can list work and life problems, as well as what you would like to improve in yourself. Completing this task in writing will increase the likelihood of successfully completing the course, and it will also be useful to compare your expectations as you progress through the course and in preparation for the final assessment.
2. Adjust your daily routine to include course learning. Find 1-2 hours for the course each day during the first week, literally scheduling this time in your personal calendar. Write your hypothesis as in the example above. Return to it after a week and write down any amendments to this initial hypothesis below.
3. Choose a time-tracking tool for the time spent on the course (preferably 2–4 Pomodoros per day, each lasting 25–30 minutes). For instance, the Focus To Do smartphone app includes an Aisystant group you can join using the code: JNSYL. Create a project titled "My Learning" in the tracker. Start using the ritual of activating the tracker: at the moment you activate it, consider that you are assuming the role of a student, and by the end of the Pomodoro session, you should have completed—read a section (pages), crafted educational notes, or developed some work artifacts related to the project. Try not to learn without activating the Pomodoro tracker and following the ritual! Write down your understanding of this important student ritual, and if necessary, read the post in the Aisystant club: https://systemsworld.club/t/zabyvaete-vklyuchat-treker-pomodoro-pochemu-eto-vazhno-i-kak-postavit-privychku/11580
4. Register in Coda (for example, via the link: <https://dash.partnerstack.com/invite/47d92fe146214dec904c286c31f77015>) or in another similar program if you would like to model in a professional modeling tool.
5. Organize your workspace so that nothing distracts you during the course. It is preferable to choose a well-ventilated room, a comfortable chair, and a screen that allows splitting it into two parts: on one screen, you study the course, and on the other, you take notes and model tables. Try to establish a ritual: as you sit down at your workspace, activate the Pomodoro timer, prepare to execute the role of a student, and create various work artifacts.
6. Explain to yourself that while studying the course, you are not just taking notes, but also recording your thoughts by composing educational notes. If you don't yet know how to keep notes (you don't have your own knowledge base), we recommend temporarily recording your thoughts in the "Questions for Review and Further Study" cells (this subsection is found in each section before the "Homework" subsection). Choose the most suitable question related to your thought or record your thought in the cell with the last item "My Notes on the Studied Section." By this means, while gradually studying the course section, you will gather answers to all the questions, instead of writing them from scratch after reading the entire section.

Try to read the section within the first three days of the study week, reserving the remaining time for modeling and completing the homework. Meanwhile, the last day before the session with the instructor (or the 6th day of the week) should be kept as a reserve. If you plan successfully, you will be able to use this day to review the material, assist fellow students, comment on drafts in the Aisystant club (not just for classmates), or formulate questions for the instructor.