---
order: 1
title: System Documentation
---

Descriptions reflect **all the crucial aspects of the system**, which means everything that addresses the subjects of interest for project roles that have been chosen to be satisfied during the creation of the system. Creating a consistent description increases the likelihood of realizing a successful target system in the physical world.

System modeling is conducted through **thinking through writing**, in which specialized tools called **modelers** are utilized. For example, modelers can be a pen and paper, Word, a wall with sticky notes and a marker, and more advanced modelers such as Coda^[For high-level modeling where all important systems and subsystems, and their relationships are described.], CAD (computer-aided design)^[For more detailed (subject-specific, applied) design, including the creation of design and technological documentation.], and so on.

The working product of system modeling with modelers is documentation. This documentation eventually becomes external memory for the team (exocortex)^[On the one hand, the modeller is also an exocortex, but the result of modeling is considered an exocortex too. This is analogous to the brain conducting thoughts, which lead to a result that is also held within the brain. However, we will consider documentation to be non-biological models on paper or computer that can be accessed by more than just their developer.]. The **format of documentation**^[The content of documentation comprises descriptions, which are defined by the subjects of interest of project roles towards the system.] can be text, outlines, tables, computer models, etc.

Our course is also a modeler in the form of tables or high-level models, in which critical systems thinking concepts are integrated. Using the course as a simulator, you can practice mastering the necessary concepts for such **high-level** modeling (which is not entirely subject-area specific). High-level modeling includes the designation^[The name and a brief description (e.g., function, structure, etc.).] of all important systems and subsystems, as well as their interrelationships. Moreover, understanding high-level models will require, at minimum, understanding the relationship between the method of description and subjects of interest, the difference between a “black box” and a “transparent box,” and broadening your perspective regarding the names and contents of key documents in the major areas of interest^[For instance, understanding what "Usage Concept" and "System Concept" documents are, and how they differ from a "Balance Sheet" or "Target Audience Description."]. 

In the future, you can use any spreadsheet editor (for instance, Coda) to describe your project and the systems involved at a high level. However, subject-specific modeling and creating the appropriate documents for role interests require using applied theories and tools^[These need to be studied separately, such as accounting theory and mastering tools like 1C for producing a balance sheet document aimed at tax interests.]. For example, CAD, 1C, PDM (Product Data Management)^[A product data management system or a product versioning system.], CRM (customer relationship management)^[CRM contains databases that describe clients as an entire system in the physical world, with individual clients being parts of this system.] and many others.

Within our course, you will learn about the **types of documents that exist, the subjects of interest they address, how they are interconnected, and the methods by which descriptions are created**. However, within the course^[And even within a systems thinking course.], you will not be studying or creating specific documents with models and descriptions. For example, we will discuss documents that describe the target audience or project roles, and also talk about the usage concept and architecture, but to develop specific examples of these documents, you will need to study relevant applied practices (methods of description).

Typically, in a project team or business, there are specialists in applied methods (marketers, architects, product owners, etc.) who specialize in developing specific documents with descriptions of various subjects of interest. The task of our course is to understand that all these documents can be viewed in the same way^[For example, recognizing the roles that create them and understanding which methods they use. Or focusing on the project roles for whom the created documentation will be addressed.] and to see their interconnections, for which mastering the **systems language** is necessary. This means knowing the relevant concepts of system modeling.