---
order: 0
title: How Systems Thinking Helps in the Workplace
---

In previous sections, we explored the core ideas and techniques of the systems approach. Now, we will provide general explanations on how to view any collective activity through the lens of systems thinking. This involves dividing the world into distinct parts and linking them together to ultimately create a successful target system without losing sight of the system-creator. This perspective will assist you not only in working within a team that develops a target system or "our system" but also in collaborating with other teams creating supersystems, surrounding systems, subsystems, or creator systems.

Let's begin with a brief description of what you have already learned about the systems approach in prior sections. Pay close attention to the second part of the following description, as it delves into the system-creator. This continues the explanation of the essence of the systems approach, introduced in the subsection "Systematicity and using systems approach" in Section 1, and further clarified in the subsection "Areas of Interest" in Section 5.

Now it's time to provide a more comprehensive description considering all learned systems concepts. The logical sequence of reasoning remains unchanged. We start with the area of interest of the supersystem, that is, we examine the world we wish to change in some way. Then we move on to the target system and its structure. Finally, we discuss the system-creator, including creation methods, roles, and resources.

The executor, in entrepreneurial roles, aims to improve the world by creating a successful system that predictably addresses certain problems (dissatisfactions) of a particular group of people (target audiences). These people, as the promoter suggests, will change their behavior, so it is crucial to understand their project roles and methods, including tools. The system's success depends on satisfying the interests of external project roles (those played by people in a specific group, like the target audience). To do this, one must assume the function of the operating system (role of the target system) in its environment and consider the subjects of interest for the project roles.

For this, the product owner (or product manager, though in Russian culture, systems analysts are often mentioned) creates a concept for using the system as a "black box." This assists the developers in crafting the system concept, describing the interaction of the system's functional parts (decomposition from the function of the operating system) and proposing its construction. It also aligns with spatial configuration and the assessment of the system's total cost of ownership (TCO considers the system's operating time, described in the usage concept, as well as the creation time, constituting a cost description of the system as a "transparent box"). These concepts are also used by the visionary to decide on the market's commercial viability with the given target system.

Alongside developers, architects are interested in the system as a "transparent box." They determine the principles of modular division and connection organization based on subjects of interest, such as architectural characteristics like availability, continuity, performance, recovery capability, reliability, safety, resilience, scalability, configurability, extensibility, installability, reusability, localization, maintainability, portability, supportability, upgradeability. Architects also use four key metrics of "total continuity": deployment frequency, change lead time, change failure rate, and incident recovery time. These make up the system architecture, derived following the Systems Approach 3.0, as a result of assessing multiple conflicts between system levels (architects have to choose the least bad solutions, as there are no perfect ones due to the Systems Approach 3.0's premise of unavoidable disruption—issues will arise from higher or lower system levels).

Following the principle of total continuity (detailed further in the subsection "Increment and Iteration"), the architect organizes autonomous system creation teams to release increments for minimally interconnected modules. The overall team strives for a detailed description of all systems with precision sufficient to manufacture the target system on the chosen production platform—and to produce a Minimum Viable Product (MVP) following methods suggested by technologists and DevOps. The system is then operated, continuously iterating improvements on parts of the system, or even drastically changing it, subsystems, or releasing other target systems.

A sufficiently effective system-creator is essential (often an organization or enterprise). For resource mobilization up to the break-even point of the production platform, the businessman attracts investor resources, concerned with the entire enterprise's success.

Thinking about the system-creator is roughly similar—its functional parts are project roles (organizational roles), performing various tasks through methods, including methods for describing different systems, including the system-creator, which also needs documentation. Constructive parts are organizational units. Company employees in different project roles perform tasks according to particular practices, as if on a production line (collaborating with other agents, including other companies, AI, equipment). This production activity is managed by the operations manager (an instance of the class "managers," including public relations managers overseeing external project roles' interests, such as tax authorities, environmentalists, or community representatives, and administrators who manage administrative workflows like accounting, HR, etc.). Initiating or organizing the conveyor line is the development director (this may be a separate position, or the CIO may simultaneously act as development director). During creation and/or continuous development of the target system, they may launch a development project for the system-creator to restructure the current production platform.

Systems thinking aimed at changing the physical world is recursive across many levels and for various systems. Within your project activities or enterprise, it might involve creating and developing not only the target system (with its subsystems) but also the system-creator. This often emphasizes a never-ending development process, requiring systems concepts and certain thinking practices for systematic organization.

The presented description of applying systems thinking might not be entirely clear, but the complete picture will form as you progress through the main Aisystant program. It's likely that the first part of this text was more comprehensible to you, but the latter part, addressing the system-creator, was less so. We will decipher this latter portion in this section.