---
order: 2
title: "Method (Practice) \u2013 Discipline and Tools"
---

A practice or method in systems thinking can be seen as a combination of **discipline and** **tools** that support this discipline. Correspondingly, **a practice implemented in an enterprise consists of agents knowledgeable in theory and** **tools**, who perform specific roles.** Notice that individuals must study the discipline and train themselves in mastering the tools.

Disciplines can include, for example, accounting or hairdressing theory, as well as marketing or operational management (textbooks are typically written on these disciplines). A discipline is studied or "placed" in the mind, while tools are additionally mastered or trained for use. Unlike disciplines, tools exist in the physical world^[A discipline is a mental space object, but it can be described on some physical medium.]. A tool is a device or object that helps create a working product. In the examples given, tools include scissors and the SAP software system (1C-accounting). "Within" these tools, specific disciplines are embedded^[Therefore, if you're developing a technology, it's likely to be used by some role according to a specific discipline as a tool. As a developer of this tool, you should have a solid understanding of the discipline that the role will use with this tool.].

For instance, a person learning to fulfill the role of an accountant studies accounting theory and masters SAP as a tool for accounting. When tasked with a job, the individual assumes the role of an accountant and uses accounting practice to create a balance sheet and an income statement. These documents are the working products created according to the rules outlined in accounting theory. The 1C program supports this theory and helps create working products. The SAP (1C) development team should include not only programmers but also highly skilled accountants.

Incidentally, instead of SAP, other tools like Excel and Word could be used. The theory remains unchanged; only the tool varies. Try reflecting on the discipline and tools in your professional methods (practices).

Any organization can be viewed as a combination or mixture of numerous methods. Just as no two people are alike because everyone has a different genetic mix, there are no identical organizations. Each enterprise has its unique combination of practices, which ultimately determine its competitiveness and, consequently, the organization’s survival. In the course of development, organizations can discover and formalize new working methods, which are then replicated like genes. In this way, other enterprises adopt and utilize best practices, leading to a literal transmission of memes.

**Every area of interest employs its organization methods** based on **the 3x3 Table**. This pertains to describing the target audience, attracting investors, architecture or systems description. For corresponding working products in each cell of the 3x3 Table, specific methods are required. If your architectural practices are excellent but your marketing practices are poor (or vice versa), your **enterprise is unlikely to be competitive**. The 3x3 Table helps remind which practices are necessary in the organization, and it also allows you to highlight the cells where you have market-leading practices and areas of interest where your practices are merely satisfactory.

Competitiveness is achieved when your organization excels in certain areas while performing satisfactorily in all other areas of interest relative to the market. However, if there's a failure somewhere, even your best practices might be rendered useless. Similarly, if all areas are operating at a "B" level, you are unlikely to become a market leader.

Therefore, attention to organization methods is a crucial part of the tasks for **the director of development, specifically the role of** **the organizational designer**. They are responsible for developing the organization's concept (as a system), defining the functional roles and their interactions, and designing the changes within the organization. Organizational designers may also be responsible for defining the authorities and responsibilities of organizational units, as well as preparing the organizational project.