---
order: 4
title: Project Roles, Their Methods, and Work Products
---

### Translation

The concept of "role" is used more frequently in professional activities than in personal life.^[Nevertheless, all discussions are applicable to personal projects.] In professional settings, the focus is mainly on project activities, which introduces the notion of a **project role.** A project role is a role performed by an agent (a human or any other intentional agent) within a project.^[If the executor is an inanimate object, we don't use the term "project role," but simply refer to it as a "role."] Alternatively, it can be enacted by an agent who influences or is connected with the system being developed in the project. We can say that project roles have certain concerns. They have a specific subject of interest related to the system.

In systems thinking, there are distinctions between **external and internal project roles.**

**Internal or team project roles** refer to roles fulfilled by members of the project team and all co-executors^[Members of the project team and co-executors are agents too.]. These roles perform corresponding methods and yield certain work products. For instance, component suppliers engage in the practice of supply, which results in components being available in stock. All internal project roles are part of the extended enterprise, meaning they conceptualize, create, and maintain the system's operation — including repairing, servicing, and disposing of it.

In relation to a vehicle system, internal project roles include the plant manager, design engineer, assembly line worker, service station specialist, marketers, repair personnel, designers, testers, component suppliers, decommissioners, and so on. They all work according to specific methods (practices) and produce their respective work products. The performers of these roles are employees of a large team that engages with the vehicle system at all stages, from conceptualization to decommissioning.

**External project roles** are those that interact with the completed system. These external project roles might be part of a supersystem, metasystem, or environment. This implies that these roles influence the system, or the system influences these project roles. They too engage in practices, and they have their own work products^[It is not recommended to refer to them simply as "client" or "user"; it's better to identify them by the roles they acknowledge, which provides insight into their methods. For example, if selling cars, the external project role should not merely be "client" but rather "driver" or "owner."]. For example, concerning the vehicle system, external project roles include drivers, passengers, pedestrians, environmentalists, and many others. Additional external project roles include the client, competitor, tax inspector, hacker, thief, and so on. Clients of the system should be divided into several roles specific to each system and/or industry. For instance, a client^[For any system, a client can be identified, so to more precisely describe their actions, it is necessary to define the role more specifically. Avoid general references to "client," as this encompasses numerous specific roles that must be considered when working with the system.] might be a payer, operator, or unpacker, etc. Try to identify the methods and work products of these roles.

A person^[Do not confuse the description of the driver role with the user persona often used in marketing. The latter describes the executor of the role (person).] in a project role makes corresponding decisions and is accountable for them. As the saying goes, they "put their skin in the game." The outcomes of these decisions result in changes to project activities, keenly emphasizing how **a project role changes the world**^[More details on this are available in the section "Roles of Analysts and Engineers. Positions" in the textbook "Systems Thinking."].

Actions by a person that **do not lead to changes in the physical world** are not considered actions of a project role. One cannot claim that a person plays a role if they do not create formal work products for which they are responsible (such as signing or otherwise staking their skin in the game). If a person fully performs a practice resulting in a work product, like a balance sheet with their signature, then it's appropriate to say they play the role of an accountant. The creation of a project role-approved work product inevitably changes the physical world^[At the very least, taxes will be paid.].