---
order: 7
title: Role Executor, Role, Function, and System Names
---

In the previous section, we briefly discussed the difference between a **physical object, functional object, and functional (role-related) behavior**. For instance, a physical object could be a microscope^[Although, when we say "microscope," we primarily refer to the role "microscope." But we also use this term for the physical item commonly called a microscope. Only through the context of the discussion can one understand this difference. It is beneficial if you grasp this duality, just like with a hammer. Someone with a systems mindset understands this distinction well. It's best to start with a stone.] or a stone. These objects can play different roles and perform various functions assigned to them by someone. A functional object or role in our example is the "nail driver." In our culture, this role is traditionally called a "hammer." Meanwhile, the function or the functional or role-related behavior is driving nails.

As previously mentioned, each role has a culturally-conditioned^[Or conditioned by cultural norms and rules, i.e., accepted in culture, in norms of behavior, usage, etc.] behavior and a corresponding established name in culture. Everyone understands the role of "hammer" and its nail-driving behavior. The physical object that can become a hammer^[That is, play the role of a hammer. Note that the same reasoning applies when discussing how a manager's role can be filled by John Doe or Jane Doe.] can be different.

This technique of thinking, where things are named by their primary function^[Or by their role-related behavior.], significantly conserves the brain's processing power. That means, first we consider the actions (behavior and other activities), and then we identify the physical objects that can perform these actions. Cultural conditioning allows for quicker agreements^[Although not all established object names adhere to this principle. Sometimes ancient names have unclear origins and often point to form or something else. As a rule of good practice, a team developing a system should correctly look for not the physical object representing the system in the name, but the role and indication of the function or actions of this role.]: there's no need to call a functional object "a person who drives a car" every time. Instead, we quickly and succinctly designate this role as "driver."^[Similarly, it was previously suggested not to call a functional object a "nail driver," but move to using the term "hammer."]

Here is a brief excerpt from what is written about this in the textbook "Systems Thinking":

"Systems are primarily considered functional (role-related) objects at the moment they fulfill their function, i.e., when they are ready and operational. In this moment, they benefit those who need that function. For example, an airplane as a system is primarily a role-related or functional object that flies itself, while transporting passengers and cargo by air. The most common purpose or function of an airplane is to enable flight, which is reflected in the system's name - 'airplane.'

The main function of a pump is to pump. That's why this name emerged culturally for this product. Manufacturers aim to please customers, thus naming their products so that customers quickly understand their utility. Customers consciously (or intuitively) grasp the desired function and become acquainted with the products by their functional names^[Products can also have other names, like personal names. Airplanes are often named after great people.]. Nonetheless, the system named by the manufacturer as "Pump NV-23"^[Here, we're dealing with a physical object - "Pump NV-23," which can perform the function of pumping and play the role of a pump.] might serve a different function for the client. For example, it could be used to circulate antifreeze. In this case, the client's request has changed to a different function; they require a functional object - an antifreeze circulator. Will the "Pump NV-23" suit as an "antifreeze circulator"? Possibly.

Thus, a pump can be named "antifreeze circulator for the second cooling loop" if its role is to circulate antifreeze in the second loop. The factory sells the physical object "Pump NV-23,"^[This product was conceived to perform the role of the pump, i.e., to perform the function of pumping.] but the buyer will use it for another role (the circulator). This happens frequently. Without a usage context, it's just a "pump," a constructive object without an environment. In the context of a role play, it's a role-related object, "antifreeze circulator for the second cooling loop." Outside the context of engineering capabilities, Masha is just Masha, capable of being many things. Similarly, a microscope: it can show small objects or be used to crack nuts, pound nails, or as a paperweight. Masha is the same way—capable of much. Yet when performing the role of an engineer, Masha would be referred to as an "engineer." And that's normal.

Thus, **it is crucial to name systems by their primary purpose,**^[Keep in mind that in established object names, this rule may not apply, but in your projects, you will save a lot of time if you adhere to it. It allows for quicker agreements and clearer understanding of client requests and your product. More details about naming a system can be found in Section 5 of the online course "Systems Thinking."] **i.e., by the roles assigned to them.** These roles define the function. However, while the function may be clear, naming the role right away can be challenging^[It quickly becomes apparent that a function like "nail driving" is needed, so accordingly, the role would be a nail driver. But naming a role as a "hammer" requires a broader activity perspective. While a hammer is understandable to most, try naming the project roles at an aircraft factory or the subsystem names of an airplane.]. To easily find a role's name, one requires a robust activity perspective.

When we name a system a "microscope," we are primarily referring to its capacity to "observe small objects" when it is fully manufactured and operational. Were we to consider using this object to hammer things, we would state that this physical object "Microscope MP-2" would play the role of a "hammer," performing the function of hammering or pounding.

Now, if someone happens to describe a person as a system, there's usually little that can be immediately discerned about their function within the environment. A person is a multi-functional object, capable of numerous actions, while also being considered a biological entity (as seen from a medical perspective, for example). We discussed in the previous section that a person can play a variety of roles. Thus, understanding people's role-related behavior or functions will always require additional and specific investigation. But **thinking** about **people** in roles and about a microscope-in-role are structured the same way!^[System thinking starts with considering systems as role (functional) objects that behave in some manner within an environment. Thus, we first look at the performed or required function, the played role, or the purpose. Only then do we delve into the construction or the physical object that will execute the identified role.]

If you're struggling with these concepts and don't grasp the significance of such differentiation for project activities, it means there's a gap in your ontological understanding. To master systems thinking, it's essential to have a **type classifier/cognitive type machine**^[Recall, this is the ability to track the types of applied concepts and not confuse, for example, role and executor, system and process, function and construction, etc.]. If you're facing difficulties with this, we recommend taking the "Rational Work" course.