---
order: 1
title: Role as a Model of Thinking
---

A typical person acts intuitively or based on experience, with their role behavior influenced by the theories instilled in them earlier^[A person may unconsciously absorb theory from interactions with others and often learns unintentionally by absorbing information from their environment or emulating someone they view as an authority figure.]. We often say that a person acts according to their **worldview**.

**Worldview** can be shaped by a scientific theory or a grandmother’s superstition. While scientific theories and disciplines provide a better description of role behavior, non-scientific worldviews are simpler and thus more appealing to the majority. When we talk about an engineer’s worldview, we primarily refer to the engineering methods they learned in university and further developed in their professional work.

A conscious method of studying professional roles involves setting relevant practices. In essence, a **person embeds discipline in their mind and acquires the skill of using** **tools (technologies)**. For example, a driver learns traffic rules and practices driving a car. The rules represent the theory (discipline), and the car is the tool. At this point, we can say the person has mastered the role of a driver, having learned the practice of "driving a car," through which they deliver the tangible product — transporting physical items (people, goods).

This approach to thinking is applicable to all actions performed by a person, both at work and in **personal life**. For instance, roles such as son, caretaker, student, motivator, dishwasher, room cleaner, subway passenger, and others can be considered in the same manner as professional roles, focusing on methods (theories, technologies, and tangible products).

Examining roles allows one to pay special or **formal attention**^[This means highlighting theory with its concepts, principles, etc.] to their behavior. For example, while learning to swim, we understand that mastering the technique (method, practice) of the crawl stroke will enable us to proficiently perform the role of a crawl swimmer^[Note that the text deliberately places the terms “role,” “method,” and “role behavior” together. You need to train your mind to differentiate these concepts, much like you distinguish between different classes of concepts such as furniture and colors. You can separately discuss chairs, tables, and wardrobes, as well as their colors, sizes, etc. Such a type classifier/cognitive type machine is developed throughout life, but only through specialized training can one significantly accelerate this process. The amount of practice and quality learning (which reduces the required time) are both important. Read more about the type classifier in the textbook “Systems Thinking.”]. In critical situations involving child upbringing, one shouldn't resort to poor automatisms and get nervous; rather, by recalling the role of a caretaker, one should seek out a suitable method to apply in interaction with the child. 

When embarking on studies, it’s useful to understand what **practices a student involves or what skillful learning entails**. The concept of “role” allows unconscious actions to become conscious, directing focus onto formal objects of attention (method, system, other roles, etc.). Typically, people learn unconsciously and cannot articulate formal learning methods (practices), that is, how or through which practices they learn.

**Consider with which** **methods** you learn? And, for instance, why the first homework of the course mentioned systematic reading and information consumption control, the Pomodoro technique, time investment, thinking through writing, and thinking by speaking. These were outlined as the main practices of the student role^[Each is elaborately presented in the “Practices of Self-Development” course.].

However, we don't always need to consciously and formally approach our actions. Behavioral automatisms conserve attention, thus some roles we perform unconsciously, like brushing teeth or taking a shower. **If we aren't looking to change behavior or the world around us,** **then there’s no need** **to trouble ourselves with role considerations**. Yet, if it's necessary to establish or modify the teeth-cleaning process, one should consciously identify the role of a tooth cleaner and find the best oral cleaning method. Then, familiarize oneself with and master the instruments—such as the toothbrush, toothpaste, mouthwash, or irrigator. Finally, practice this role behavior until it becomes automatic.

Changing one's behavior is literally altering one's thinking (acquiring new techniques), and to do this, it's essential to pay attention to one's actions. The **concept of "role" as a thinking model** allows for this transition, and thinking mastery helps identify and quickly establish necessary applied practices.

It’s crucial to understand that behind every project role is a **method** (**practice**) and a tangible product. By identifying someone by their role, we simultaneously define a whole class of practices through which the role produces tangible products. For example, for the role of a swimmer, we immediately determine a possible class of practices—crawl, breaststroke, butterfly. Speaking about an entrepreneur, we consider other practices like Business Model Canvas, Lean Startup, Lean Canvas, and others. I hope you now realize that each role has many practices: distinctive ones for a surgeon, operations manager, financier, engineer, architect, caretaker, etc.

In ancient times, masters simply performed their tasks without often reflecting on the formalization of their actions. Nonetheless, unique historical artifacts were created during those times. However, the complexity of the modern world is utterly different, and through formalizing work methods, more people can become masters at their craft, allowing humanity to create a large number of successful systems overall.

Without role examination, it’s impossible to manage the complexity of the current stage of human development. Today's individual will always be in demand if they continuously learn and timely re-learn. Systems thinking is a **way** **to formalize** the actions and behaviors of numerous interested parties. The concept of “role” is a fundamental idea for such formalization.