---
order: 8
title: 'Role Performers: Agent and Their Intentions, Strategy, and Plans'
---

When dealing with roles, it's important not to overlook the executor of the role as an agent. An agent is a person or another subject (organization, teams, or soon AI) who intends to take actions to alleviate dissatisfaction. The concept of a person is too broad^[For example, speaking of a person can also involve considering the organism and its structure. But we will not address that here, so the concept of "agent" allows us to narrow the broad notion of "person."]. We need to pay attention to the dissatisfactions and desires of a person that inform their actions.

When discussing a person, there's a risk of venturing into psychological terminology, which is less formal and not suitable for systems modeling. Therefore, to talk about a person-agent, the concept of "**intention**" is introduced^[Do not confuse: intention refers to the person-agent or executor, while preference refers to the role. Therefore, it's correct to say: "the person intends to perform an action" and "the person in the role has a role interest" or "the role has a role interest." It's incorrect from a systems thinking perspective to say "the role has an intention," but rather "the person pursues a role interest."]. Intention allows us to discuss the executor of the role rather than the role itself. That is, "preference" relates to the role, whereas "intention" pertains to the executor of the role.

In the textbook "Systems Self-Development," a **scheme of connection between psychology and systems thinking** was introduced. We will refine it slightly here. When feeling dissatisfied, the person-agent intends to assume a role so that through action, they can address this dissatisfaction. Simultaneously, the agent in the role, using this method, participates in creating a certain system.

An agent acts according to the role and thus pursues a role interest (preference) in the system. However, agents can also intentionally switch between roles, and, as a result, we might observe a shift in preferences. For example, we might expect someone to play one role and pursue the corresponding role interests, but they might have switched roles and are pursuing a different role interest, possibly even within a different system. To work with the agent's intentions, separate practices^[Essentially, this involves creating a system meant to fulfill a specific role. But this system is not made of metal, plastic, or other materials, but of 'flesh and blood.' If inanimate systems are created exclusively through engineering methods, then for biological systems, that's not enough. If you need to work at the level of body parts, you’d involve medical professionals; at the genetic level, neurobiologists; and at the level of the entire organism, trainers (e.g., teaching swimming), educators (teaching professional methods), and systems leaders (facilitating the adoption of correct roles).] are necessary, foremost among them, **systems leadership**. Systems leadership is a method of placing an executor-agent into a project role. An inanimate physical object is put into a role using standard engineering methods^[For example, mechanical engineering "places" a specific "M-1245 Engine" into the role of a car motor.], but for an agent, these methods are replaced by systems leadership.

The concept of "intention" is primarily needed to identify specific people who have some connection to your system and project. By identifying specific people, you can determine project roles, or conversely, connect project roles to specific people.

Frequently, you may find yourself surrounded by many people, but you may not understand their intentions, and thus, you do not know if they are **stakeholders**^[A person might be playing another role during the discussion. One that doesn't relate to your project. The actor-person at that moment fulfills the intention to play a role different from what you expect, a completely different one. At this moment, you have no stakeholder role or, more precisely, no actor in this role. This is where systems leadership comes into play if you want to change the intention of the actor-person.]. Sometimes, on the contrary, there is no one around you, or you are working with a small team, but somewhere there are people who want something from you or your project. By identifying these people's intentions, you can better understand if they are stakeholders and what roles they play concerning your system.

Therefore, when working with project roles, it's essential to know all executors and their intentions. If the executors' intentions are unrelated to the project roles in your project, then you have either chosen the wrong executors, or you will need to change their intentions.