---
order: 5
title: Subject of Interest, Role Interest, or Preference
---

## Analyzing "Subject of Interest" and "Role Interest" (Preference)

Let’s delve deeper into the concepts of "subject of interest" and "role interest" (preference). It's crucial to remember that when we discuss a project role (with an agent acting as the executor), we automatically imply that this role has a specific subject of interest within the system, meaning there’s something in the system that it finds intriguing. Ultimately, in systems thinking, what's significant isn't the roles themselves, but the system characteristics that these roles need. Through roles and their methods, you can access the system's characteristics. It can be said that a role is preoccupied with system features that are crucial to it.

A **subject of interest** is an important system characteristic, and it’s critical to separate “system” from “subjects of interest” in discussions, as a mental exercise. For example, a car system can be characterized by its cost, speed, color, design, and more. According to the international standard ISO 42010, a rough list of subjects of interest includes functionality, attainability, usability, purpose, system capabilities, system properties, known limitations, structure, behavior, performance/productivity, resource usage, reliability, protection, integrity, and information security, complexity, ability to evolve, openness, execution parallelism, autonomy, cost, schedule, quality of service, flexibility in use, flexibility in development, modification capability, modularity, management, inter-process communications, mutual blockages, state changes, subsystem integration, data availability, privacy, compliance with legislation, justification, organizational goals and strategies, user experience, maintainability, cost acceptability, and ease of decommissioning and disposal. As you understand, this list is not exhaustive; different systems may have other characteristics (subjects of interest). The price is a subject of interest to the buyer, hence we can say their subject of interest is the price (or cost). Notice that the subject of interest to the system is for the role, not the agent (executor of the role). For example, "John Doe" or "Andrew Smith" in the role of a buyer share the same subject of interest concerning the car's price.

Importantly, **subjects of interest should not be confused with system functions**. Systems may have unique functions, but the subjects of interest are often common across various systems. For example, a chair and a table have different functions, yet their subjects of interest might be similar: cost, size, stability, reliability, etc.

Notably, isolating and implementing important system characteristics is, in itself, a separate subject of interest for the **architect's role**. This is because the system architect’s work requires knowledge of system characteristics. For example, an architect may be interested in reliability, safety, stability, scalability, availability, continuity, performance, configurability, expandability, reusability, localization, maintainability, portability, upgradeability, etc.

The architect works with these subjects of interest, known as **architectural characteristics**, leading to constructive solutions or propositions for dividing the system into specific modules. Architectural solutions help in modularizing the system. You don’t need to know architectural methods or work as an architect, but understanding the essence of architectural work from a systems thinking perspective is important: what the architect does and what their work product is. Similarly, you might not perform plumbing work in your apartment, but you are well aware of the plumber's job and can even assign tasks and approve their work.

Various roles may share the same subject of interest. However, **role interest** can differ among those roles. Hence, the concept of **preference** is introduced. It indicates what a particular role desires within the subject of interest. Cost concerns both the buyer and the seller, yet their preferences or role interests differ. The subject of interest is the same, but the buyer prefers a lower price, while the seller prefers it higher. Therefore, the preferences (or role interests) of the roles differ, even though the subject of interest remains the same.

When identifying a project role, you simultaneously imply that there are specific subjects of interest. **Project role names in culture are linked to** **subjects** **of interest** **in the system**. For example, a manager’s subject of interest in an "enterprise" system is timelines, finances, budget, etc. Managers aren’t concerned with the entire enterprise, only specific characteristics. Other roles have interests in different system characteristics. For instance, the practitioner manager is interested in methods and practices used within the enterprise. For example, this role would want to know what IT program is used in an automotive corporation's project office: does it allow drawing models in 2D or 3D? It’s possible to envision interest as a variable, with preference being its specific value.

Understanding subjects of interest, like knowing the names of project roles, is **general awareness**. Most people have good practical awareness in the field of medicine. For some, this area may be more familiar than entrepreneurship, engineering, or management. You know that there are different types of doctors and can even guess their subjects of interest. For instance, you can distinguish a therapist from a pediatrician and understand what interests otolaryngologists and dentists. However, you might struggle to name even three roles that belong to classes like "engineers" or "managers" unless you have specifically studied them. Therefore, after studying systems thinking, it’s essential to also learn about systems management and engineering. These are transdisciplinary fields of knowledge that are valuable to any professional aiming to cultivate a strong intellect.

For a successful practitioner, understanding roles and interests in project activities, in general, is much more critical than expertise in a specific field. Our educational program is designed precisely to cultivate this general awareness.