---
title: Documentation – is it a system? Is a work artifact a system?
---

Quite often students ask this question: "Documentation is presented in the physical world, so is it a system? After all, a menu, a book, and a passport need to be created." This is a good question, and those who ask it dig deep.

Strangely enough, the answer to this question is related to attention. **Systems thinking relies on** **methods** **of managing** **attention**. People studying systems thinking often quickly jump from one project to another and miss the point that they start talking about one context and end up with a third. Therefore, it is recommended to base on not too complex activities, which won't allow you to "detach from the ground" in reasoning.

If we are discussing the "human" system, then the concepts of "system embodiment, description, and documentation" are tied to it. In this regard, the passport, driver's license, and everything else in this project will be documentation of the "human-citizen" system. But if you now want to discuss the passport as a system, that is another consideration and another project. For example, a project to create the information medium "passport". Notice how our **focus of attention changed**.

Not everyone immediately understands how the context changes in a conversation. In the project of creating a passport, its content, that is, the description of the "human-citizen" system, is not so important. Information in the passport will be discussed in the first project, where the "human-citizen" system is described. Correspondingly, how to describe the citizen is decided in the first project.

In the second project, the main focus will be on the medium itself, not the information it contains. In the previous section, we already noted: "But **when talking about description media, we did not say anything about the content of the description**." The passport content is defined in the human-citizen project, and the characteristics of the "passport" system are primarily related to its fraud protection or the number of pages.

Another example. System engineer Ivan is responsible for describing the car system. And it's secretary Dasha's responsibility to put this content on an information carrier. Dasha will carefully record Ivan's words and then print them on A4 paper, or Ivan himself will demonstrate the car description to colleagues on a computer. Notice that the secretary is not interested in the content, that is, the description of the "car" system.

Dasha (or Ivan, but in the role of a speaker) is interested in the information carrier. There are other projects where, for example, Dasha will also play the engineer’s role, creating the information carrier system. It could be A4 sheet or several stitched sheets with a system description. In place of the A4 sheet or presentation could be a passport, book, website, digital twin (IT system), etc. All these carriers need to be created, and specific engineering roles will be employed for this work. For example, a book is published by a printer and other publishing roles.

Therefore, one of the mental techniques is **consciously** **shifting** **attention across different projects**^[For this, in section 5, we will talk about concepts such as systems levels and creating chains. These concepts will aid in working with multiple projects.]**.** There is content, and there is an information carrier on which this content is located. You cannot confuse these concepts. In one project, we discuss the car as an embodiment of the system, its descriptions in the form of various characteristics (objects of interest), and documentation – on paper, in presentations, on a computer, etc. In another project, other people (or the same people but in different roles) discuss how to beautifully create a booklet, website, or digital model. Of course, there is a connection between the projects, and a systems person understands it well through the applied systems thinking techniques. This means they can manage their attention when necessary.

Thus, you also need to see in any of your projects the embodiment, description, and documentation of the system. But there may always be another project or another activity in which the documentation of the system will be created in terms of its embodiment in the physical world. The content or description of the system on this medium is determined in your project. Do not confuse different projects.

And **what is a "work artifact"?** A work artifact always exists in the physical world (4D). A system is also a work artifact created by a team. But not every work artifact is a system. A work artifact, in addition to being a system, may also be system documentation. For example, a car is a work artifact of an auto concern, but in the auto concern's design bureau, a team creates a work artifact – a 3D model of the car. This three-dimensional model is the documentation of the car system. In the car creation project, the 3D model (in the computer) is not considered on its own as car system documentation. This documentation, as a medium, contains important descriptions of the car system.

Let’s end by connecting another trio of concepts in the following sentence: "**A work artifact** in the form of **system documentation** is created by some **description method**." Try to understand this sentence and discuss it in a group or draft it in the AISYSTANT club, providing examples from a work project.