---
title: 'Systems and Functions: Naming Matters'
---

One common problem with understanding systems thinking is that **people get confused with the names of systems** and rely too much on common sense and the objective naming of physical objects^[Read section 2 of the course and try to understand the difference between a word, a physical object, and a system. After studying sections 3--5, you may return to this and reread it. There is a high chance you will better understand the differences between the different generations of the systems approach (from 1.0 to 3.0).]. For example, a student is asked to name a system that generates energy for a house. He describes: "This system will be called Tesla Model X electric car, which delivers the main function—electric energy generation for my house." The student goes on to explain that this can be done in reality. We were considering an educational example, and therefore we were not interested in the technology of connecting a Tesla to the home grid.

Note that there is a typical error in the student's description: the words "Tesla Model X electric car" were used as a physical object-module, whereas a system name (functional name) based on the main function was required. From a methodological point of view, it would be correct to say: "The Tesla Model X electric car will serve as a generator, which will provide electric energy for the house." Thus, the functional name of the system is "generator," and the main function is energy generation. Alternatively, one could talk about the Tesla Model X as a vehicle (also a functional name) which delivers the main function—movement or transportation (but not energy generation).

Let's also reflect a bit on the **example of the physical object** **"stone."** Note that here, unlike with a car, there is no functional name: it is difficult to assign a function to a stone (unlike a hammer or a car). The example with the stone, in this sense, well demonstrates that there are objective items, not initially loaded with some culturally widespread functional meaning.

Suppose you need to carry out two projects: in one, you need to fasten boards, and in another, you are speaking outdoors and have many sheets of paper on the table. When you describe (model) these projects, systems, and subsystems, in the first case, among other systems, you will have in mind a system or functional object "hammer"^[This name has become a culturally-conditioned concept, like the role name "driver."], and in the second—"paperweight." The words "hammer" and "paperweight" convey the functional behavior of systems, clearly conveying their main functions. This is an example of why it is always necessary to look for system names that clearly denote the main functions.

Of course, you can say in both projects that there is a system "stone," but from this, it will be unclear what to do with it. Although if these are not your first projects and you have experience, for you, a stone automatically in the mind turns into a "hammer" in one project and a "paperweight" in another. Therefore, a professional in his activity often doesn’t notice the need to name systems by main functions. He has already become accustomed to using a stone for driving nails or for weighing down papers lying on the table.

The most common mistakes include when "hammer" (functional object) is written, but the main function, for some reason, is specified to hold down paper. Of course, in everyday life, anything is possible, and a student can justify to me that the physical object hammer (in this case, functional and modular meanings coincide) can hold down paper. But what does the system as the role "hammer" do in the project of speaking to an audience outdoors? Isn't this nonsense? Or even better: what does the "paperweight" do in the board fastening project?

Now, you understand that the word "hammer" can be used as a functional system name and as a physical object (analogous to stone). Usually, a person, from context and intuitively, understands what is meant in a specific everyday situation. But in projects, not everything is so simple, especially if it's a new project. You need to realize that in one project, you have the system "hammer" (as a functional object, or if "hammer" is too difficult, then say "nailer"), and this role can be fulfilled by a stone, a microscope, etc. And accordingly, its main function is to drive nails. In another project, you have the role "paperweight," which can be fulfilled by a stone or other physical objects—a hammer or a microscope. But the main function is to hold down paper.

**Systems thinking** **is counterintuitive**, and here is an example that proves this. There are many such non-obvious things in systems thinking, but they can be figured out by mastering the necessary systems techniques. Then you can indeed see the world in a new way and improve it first for yourself and then for others.