---
order: 3
title: Is Documentation a System? Is a Work Product a System?
---

# Is Documentation a System? Is a Work Product a System?

Quite often, students ask the question: "Documentation exists in the physical world, so is it a system? After all, menus, books, and passports need to be created." This is a good question, and those who ask it are digging deep.

Strangely enough, the answer to this question is tied to attention. Systems thinking relies on techniques for managing attention. Often, people studying systems thinking quickly jump from one project to another and lose sight of the fact that they start talking about one context and end up in another. Therefore, it is recommended to base these discussions on less complex activities that prevent "losing touch with reality" in reasoning.

If we discuss the "person" system, we associate the concepts of "embodiment, description, and system documentation" with it. In this context, a passport, driver's license, and everything else in this project will be the documentation of the "citizen-person" system. However, if you now want to discuss a passport as a system, that is a different analysis and a different project—for example, a project focused on creating the information carrier "passport." Notice how our focus has shifted.

Many do not immediately understand how the context changes during a conversation. In the passport creation project, the content, i.e., the description of the "citizen-person" system, is not as important. The information in the passport will be discussed in the first project, where it concerns the description of the "citizen-person" system. Consequently, decisions about how to describe a citizen are made in the first project.

In the second project, the main concern is the carrier itself, not the information it contains. In a previous section, we noted: "But when discussing information carriers, we said nothing about the content of the description itself." The content of the passport is determined in the project concerning the person as a citizen, while the characteristics of the "passport" system are primarily about its protection against counterfeiting or the number of pages it contains.

Here's another example. The system engineer, John Doe, is responsible for describing the automobile system. Meanwhile, it's up to Secretary Dasha to ensure that this content ends up on an information carrier. Dasha carefully transcribes John's words and then prints them on A4 paper, or John himself demonstrates the car description to colleagues on a computer. Note that the content—i.e., the automobile system description—is not what interests the secretary.

Dasha (or John, now in the role of a speaker) is interested in the information carrier. In other projects, for example, Dasha may play the role of an engineer who creates the system—information carrier. It could be an A4 sheet or several stitched sheets with the system description. In place of A4 sheets or a presentation, there could be a passport, book, website, digital twin (IT system), etc. All these carriers need to be manufactured, and for each, specific engineering roles will be engaged. For instance, a book is published by a printer and involves other roles in the publishing business.

Thus, one of the thinking techniques is the conscious shifting of attention across different projects. There's content, and there's an information carrier holding that content. These concepts should not be confused. In one project, we discuss a car as an embodiment of a system, its descriptions in the form of various characteristics (subjects of interest), and documentation—on paper, in presentations, on computers, etc. In another project, different people (or the same people but in different roles) discuss how to create a booklet, website, or digital model attractively. Of course, there is a connection between projects, and a systems-oriented person understands this well through the use of systems thinking techniques, thus managing their attention effectively.

Therefore, you also need to see the embodiment, description, and system documentation in any of your projects. However, there may always be another project or activity where system documentation is created from the perspective of embodying it in the physical world. The content or description of the system, which will be on this carrier, is determined in your project. Do not get confused between different projects.

What is a "work artifact”? A work artifact always exists in the physical world (4D). A system is also a work artifact created by a team. However, not every work artifact is a system. A work artifact, besides being a system, can also be a system's documentation. For example, an automobile is a work artifact of an automotive corporation, but in the design bureau of the automotive corporation, the team creates a work artifact—a 3D model of the car. This three-dimensional model serves as the system documentation for the car. In the car creation project, the 3D model (in the computer) is viewed not in isolation but as the documentation of the car system. This documentation as a carrier contains the crucial description of the car system.

Let's conclude by connecting another trio of concepts in the following sentence: "A work artifact in the form of system documentation is created according to some method of description." Try to grasp this sentence and discuss it within a group or prepare a draft in the Aisystant club, providing examples from a work project.