---
order: 6
title: 'Systems and Functions: Names Matter'
---

# Systems and Functions: Names Matter

One common issue with understanding systems thinking is that people often get confused with the naming of systems and over-rely on common sense and the objective naming of physical objects. For example, a student might be asked to provide the name of a system that generates energy for a house. The student describes: “This system will be called the Tesla Model X electric vehicle, which performs the main function—generating electrical energy for my house.” The student further explains that this is practically feasible. However, we were considering a study example, so we weren't concerned with the technology of connecting the Tesla to the home network.

Note that the student's description contains a typical mistake: the words “Tesla Model X electric vehicle” were used as a physical object-module, whereas a system name (a functional name) based on the main function should have been provided. From a methodological point of view, it would be more accurate to say: “The Tesla Model X electric vehicle will serve as a generator that supplies electrical energy for the home.” Hence, the functional name of the system should be “generator,” with its main function being energy generation. Alternatively, one could speak of the Tesla Model X as a vehicle (also a functional name) which has the main function of movement or transportation (but not energy generation).

Let’s further ponder using the example of the physical object “stone.” Note that, unlike a car, there is no functional name here: it's hard to assign a function to a stone (unlike a hammer or a car). The stone example effectively demonstrates that some objects are inherently objective, meaning they are not initially burdened with any culturally common functional meaning.

Suppose you need to execute two projects: in one, you need to fasten boards, and in the other, you are delivering a presentation on the street, and you have many papers on the table. When you describe (model) these projects, systems, and subsystems, in the first case, among other systems, you will consider the system or functional object "hammer" (this name has become a culturally-conditioned concept, much like the role "driver"), and in the second case, "paperweight." The words "hammer" and "paperweight" convey the functional behavior of systems clearly, highlighting their main functions. This exemplifies the necessity of always seeking system names that clearly denote the principal functions.

You could, of course, say that there is a “stone” system in both projects, but this doesn’t clarify what to do with it. However, if these are not your first projects and you have experience, a stone automatically transforms in your mind into a “hammer” in one project and a “paperweight” in another. Therefore, a professional in their activity often doesn’t notice the need to name systems by their main functions. They’ve already become accustomed to using a stone for driving nails or holding papers on a table.

Common mistakes include writing "hammer" (a functional object) when the main function indicated is to hold paper. In everyday life, anything is possible, and a student might justify to me that a physical object like a hammer (here the functional and modular meanings coincide) can hold paper. But what does a system using the role "hammer" do in a street presentation project? Isn’t that nonsense? Or even better: what does a "paperweight" do in a board-fastening project?

Now you understand that the word “hammer” can serve as both a functional system name and a physical object (similarly to a stone). People usually infer the context and intuitively grasp what is being discussed in specific, everyday situations. But in projects, it's not that simple, especially if it's a new project. You need to be aware that in one project, you have a system "hammer" (as a functional object, or if talking about a hammer is complex, then say "nailer"), and this role can be fulfilled by a stone, microscope, etc. Its main function is to drive nails. In another project, you have the role "paperweight," which can be fulfilled by a stone or other physical objects—a hammer or microscope. But the main function is to hold paper.

Systems thinking is counterintuitive, and this example demonstrates that. There are many such non-obvious elements in systems thinking, but they can be understood by mastering necessary systems techniques. You will then genuinely see the world in a newfound way and can improve it first for yourself, and subsequently for others.