---
order: 5
title: Classical Systems Approach 1.0
---

At the core of the systems concept lies the term "system." Using systems approach, an actor reflects on the world of objects and/or things. Here, one can draw an analogy with physics, where the concept "physical body" is introduced. This refers to a material object with mass, shape, and volume. Subsequently, in physics, discussions and laws pertain to the physical body, and when physical laws are applied in practice, the "physical body" is replaced with the corresponding material object: a road, a chair, a rocket, or an engine piston.

Similarly, the concept of "system" applies. Every professional works with their systems. For some, the system might be a house, a computer program, or a trained artificial intelligence; for others, a child ready for adult life, or a grown tree or grove. Consciously or unconsciously, everyone creates systems. A systems actor does this consciously, relying on various systems methodologies.

In specific projects, "systems" are selected from the physical world by the attention of an individual or a team. Systems thinking is the ability to identify, describe, and create systems, often through the involvement of professionals in applied methods. The systems concept offers methodologies based on the term "system" to develop systems thinking. There are several generations of systems approach, each containing different methodologies. While all systems methodologies are based on the concept of "system," they each have unique sets of concepts. Beyond these differences, methodologies are also distinguished by the generations of the systems approach. The presence of the concept of "system" unites all methodologies of each generation.

In the first version of the systems approach, established by Ludvig von Bertalanffy, systems are viewed as objects representing a certain class. Take the system "watch" for example. Note that this is an ideal representation (even though we imagine the watch as physical), not a specific physical object you can point to. We are not discussing a wristwatch or a watch on a space station. An objective consideration of systems implied that systems are objects, and they were discussed independently of subjects. Therefore, in systems approach 1.0, you could simply discuss a watch, a table, or a car and identify various properties in these systems—integrity, emergence, and hierarchy. The classical approach predominantly examines these three properties of any system.

A person cannot simultaneously consider the entire world, as the computational power of the brain is insufficient. Attention allows a person to highlight what is important from reality while trying not to lose the context of this important element within the broader world. The concept "system" enables the management of attention. Hence, sometimes it is said that systems thinking is the ability to manage one's attention.

The property of "integrity" suggests that a system has a boundary, and the connections between the parts of the system are much stronger than those with other objects in the physical reality. This property aids in highlighting systems for attention. For simple objects like a table or car, boundary issues don’t arise, but when considering complex systems (such as an airport or university), understanding boundaries can be challenging. It's not straightforward to comprehend what constitutes a water safety system, a pass issuance system, or a heating system. We will discuss complex systems in more detail later.

The second important property of a system is "emergence." In English, "emerge" means to appear. Emergence means that the system has a new property (function) that wasn't present in any of its individual parts. For instance, the engine, chassis, and cabin together form the car system, which gains the function of transporting a passenger. None of the car’s parts have this function individually. It emerges when all subsystems are combined. Every system possesses the property of emergence; if it lacks this function, it is not a system.

The third property of classical systems is "hierarchy." Hierarchy can be visualized like a nested doll: one system fits into another, which becomes its supersystem. The property of hierarchy means that any system itself serves as a supersystem for some subsystems and is also part of a larger supersystem. Whenever we talk about having a system, it automatically possesses subsystems and a supersystem.

All three aforementioned properties of the classical systems concept help highlight necessary objects from the physical world, maintain focus on the system itself, and, when needed, examine its structure (subsystems), while also preserving the system's connection with the physical world (supersystem).

Let's consider an example—the "watch" system. Firstly, this system can always be represented in the physical world. A watch has the property of integrity, possessing a boundary. It also demonstrates an emergent property; it has a function—to tell time. This function appears only when all watch parts are assembled. None of the watch parts have this property individually. Hierarchy is evident because each element of the watch is part of the entire system. Moreover, the watch face itself also has subsystems. Each subsystem will have its own properties of integrity, emergence, and hierarchy.

Hence, the classical systems concept sets a certain way of thinking or worldview through the properties of a system, and this cognitive method will be applied in developing the next generations of the systems approach 2.0 and 3.0.