---
order: 1
title: Intelligence Stack and Self-Development Stack
---

Let's imagine you've been tasked with understanding transportation operations, banking, or IT. It's quite likely you'll approach this challenge based on your practical experience. But if you're in IT, you might not have expertise in road systems, and similarly, a road engineer is unlikely to understand IT. And perhaps you're also not very familiar with banking terminology, which leaves you wondering where to even start. However, if you possess systems thinking, **your intellect will focus on the objects that exist in any field of activity**: roles, methods (practices)^[The concepts of "method" and "practice" will be used interchangeably in the course. Note, however, that in some contexts, "practice" refers to activities as opposed to theory.], work products, systems, architecture, and other systems concept.

**Thinking mastery (intellect) helps tackle new challenges, and therefore, applied disciplines are not suitable for its development**^[Studying operational management, accounting, or swim stroke techniques won't develop intellect. Of course, the more you study and the more problems you solve, the more likely your intellect grows. But besides practical activities, a theoretical foundation is crucial. Therefore, the development of intellect depends on both theory and practical experience.]. Intellect is demonstrated through the ability to handle new situations: an unknown work problem, a personal life situation, studying new theories, or mastering new tools. And even if it were possible to create applied theories for every new problem, one person wouldn't be able to know them all. Intellect aids you in learning necessary theories, and a strong intellect enables you to do so much faster.

Each person has innate intellect that predominantly develops through practice: children learn to handle new challenges in life like crawling, walking, running, speaking, managing attention, etc. As one matures, knowledge becomes significant for developing intellect. This involves not just any disciplines, but thinking theories which help address new problems. These differ from applied disciplines that solve specific classes of problems. Therefore, such thinking disciplines are referred to as **transdisciplines**. A transdiscipline sets concepts and principles for multiple disciplines or fields of knowledge^[For example, mathematics as a transdiscipline provides the mathematical language for other fields such as physics, chemistry, etc. Transdiscipline itself is a discipline, but we often highlight relationships like "transdiscipline–discipline." There are other classifications of knowledge, like "fundamental and humanities."].

The complete **list of transdisciplines in the intellect stack** **includes**^[The order of presentation in the intellect stack is approximate, and the use of explanations requires knowledge from transdisciplines lower in the stack. The intellect stack represents a grid of knowledge where different transdisciplines and explanations intertwine.]: 1. Systems Engineering 2. Methodology 3. Rhetoric 4. Ethics 5. Aesthetics 6. Research 7. Rationality 8. Logic 9. Algorithmics 10. Ontology 11. Theory of Concepts 12. Physics 13. Mathematics 14. Semantics 15. Composure 16. Conceptualization.

**The intellect stack literally integrates the intellect with specific concepts, principles, and thinking techniques**, enabling us to think abstractly, appropriately, consciously, rationally, and using systems approach. It allows the development of thinking models, working with data, and acting in the real world. With the help of the intellect stack, you can more easily and quickly navigate new work and life areas, focus and reason without obvious mistakes, and create successful systems.

In Aisystant, besides consciously developing intellect through the intellect stack, students are taught **practical practices associated with the role of a student**. A driver or a manager has their own set of applied theories they know. Similarly, there are practical practices highlighted for the role of a student — these are **practices of self-development**.

In the course “Practices of Self-Development,” such universal practices are gathered, applicable throughout life (like arithmetic): investing and time accounting; systematic slow reading; thinking through writing; thinking by speaking; organizing leisure; forming an environment; strategizing; and planning.

Conscious mastery of self-development practices is called **new or second literacy.** We consider these practices to be the personal practices of a cultured 21st-century person who consciously learns throughout their life. The course "Practices of Self-Development" helps to understand what "learning how to learn" is and how the aforementioned practices form self-development mastery or the ability to develop autonomously and perpetually. If you are adept at student practices, they, alongside intellect, will also help you learn faster.