---
order: 8
title: 'About Communication: Form versus Content'
---

**Systems Thinking** is incredibly useful for large teams, especially when organizing the work of specialists from different fields. **Systems thinking is facilitated** **among people**, and **it is intended** **to aid them in reaching agreements**^[This refers not only to the team but to all stakeholders.]. Therefore, let's focus on communication.

In any communication, there is a **transmission and reception of information**. This exchange highlights the form of delivery and the content being transmitted. Each person might notice what they react to more. To illustrate the idea of "form versus content," let's assume that an average person pays 80% of their attention to form and only 20% to content^[These figures are hypothetical.].

A focused person can shift this ratio by concentrating on the content. For instance, by understanding from which role a person is speaking. **A focused person manages their attention**, meaning they consciously concentrate on the concepts and theories used by their conversation partner. An average person lets their intuition manage their attention; therefore, they primarily evaluate communication through the "fight-or-flight" response. They might get upset by the form, ignoring the content that could positively change their life.

If the brain is not trained to discern content, the **natural mode** takes over — placing more emphasis on the psychological-emotional aspects. The form is perceived quickly without much effort. Indirectly, you can judge the content by the form. However, it is crucial to see beyond the form and understand the content, even under the most challenging conditions of receiving it. This requires acquiring specific thinking mastery, which ordinary people might develop with age if they're lucky. It's better to be aware of it and attempt to develop it systematically.

Students may complain about a teacher who presents information in a dull and uninteresting manner. We won't justify the teacher, but regardless, what should the student do? After all, it’s the student who needs the knowledge. They’ll have to develop **thinking mastery:** taking control over the natural mode (which pays attention to form) and striving to delve into the content. Sometimes, this means pushing through the desperate urge to give up. It's best to follow the principle: “Nothing personal, just role interest.”

You can train your thinking mastery through practice, but understanding the theory of roles, focus (attention management), ontology, and logic (being aware of the domain with its concepts and terms) is essential. Start using this **method of separating form and content** in your interactions.

Let’s pay attention to several examples demonstrating the importance of content in the communication process:

1. In communication, you need to adhere to the **principles of grounding**. Grounding means anchoring to the physical world. When communicating, you convey some world (systems) description, so it's necessary to ground your descriptions. This increases the chance of being understood. It’s vital to relate abstract concepts and descriptions to specific situations in the physical world. When abstract ideas appear, ask for examples of situations to which these concepts apply. This will help avoid confusion and ensure clearer understanding. See grounding examples in modeling assignments.
2. Everyone views a system (has a specific interest) or models a particular situation based on their worldview. Even if someone doesn’t realize it, they rely on some theory (which they studied) or lay understanding (folk wisdom, memes, experience, or upbringing). To negotiate with them, pay attention to their **ontology** (the concepts they use)^[For this, it's recommended to take the "Rational Work" course before "Systems Thinking."], while making sure the right form of communication is created. Ontological thinking prevents confusing word types, like saying, "I visited Paris, London, and China"—where different word types ("city" and "country") clash. In systems thinking, it's crucial not to confuse types, such as calling the cleaning process a system or saying a manager plays the role of an engineer^[It's valid to say John, who is a manager, sometimes also plays the role of an engineer. In systems thinking, clarity in type differentiation is vital for effective modeling and communication within a large team.].
3. **Corporate culture** is built on values, mission, norms of behavior, traditions, and theories embraced within organizations. However, at the core of any culture is language, which reflects the practices and knowledge adopted by the entire team. Therefore, it’s crucial to pay attention to the concepts you and your company’s staff use. To establish systems thinking, you must first master the systemic language—learn to use it fluently in communication and integrate it into your corporate culture.
4. When we talk about a **course**, we focus on the form of content delivery, which can be discussed separately and in detail. For instance, a course might be presented in textbook form or as an online text or video course. Note that nothing has been mentioned about the course content, which could be about management, marketing, or freestyle swimming. Remember, the content of any course is a discipline (theory) or several interconnected disciplines. In courses on systems thinking^[In this context, when you hear "systems thinking," someone might mean they're taking a course by that name. However, it's most likely about thinking using the concept of "system" and other cross-discipline terms of the intelligence stack.] the discipline "systems thinking" isn't taught; instead, several cross-disciplines from the intelligence stack are covered, selecting concepts and principles to describe and cultivate methods (approaches) for dividing the world into different systems and subsystems.