---
order: 4
title: What Does "Apply Systems Thinking" Mean?
---

**Applying Systems Thinking**

Applying systems thinking means skillfully utilizing **transdisciplinary concepts of the intelligence stack** in your activities. Mastery of the basic concepts involves not just knowing each term but also being able to connect them with each other and apply them to your projects. In the course, you study the concepts of systems thinking, linking them not only among themselves but also with concepts from entrepreneurship, engineering, and management.

When someone says they will apply a systems approach, it means they will use the basic concepts of systems thinking in their activities. If a person does not possess these concepts, they may be logical, systematic, professional, and much more, but certainly not using systems approach.

**A professional with a lengthy resume does not necessarily possess systems thinking skills.** While they can tackle complex tasks in their area of expertise, we will consider someone a systems actor if they consciously^[This means focusing on the basic concepts and identifying them in work projects.] study and apply the concepts of modern systems methodology in their professional and personal projects. ^[This does not guarantee that all these projects will be successful. However, all other conditions being equal, the likelihood of success with systems thinking increases.]

Furthermore, a systems actor should have a well-set **"type classifier/cognitive type machine"**—the ability to track the types of applied concepts. For instance, an average adult can spot the inconsistency in the following list: "I visited New York, London, and China," where the type "city" is used along with the type "country," which is incorrect from a systems thinking perspective, and it's better not to mix types. Similarly, a systems actor detects inconsistencies in sentences like: "John Doe, Andrew Smith, and the contractor's accountant attended the meeting," or "I perform the roles of marketer, financier, and department head." Here, the type "executor/performer" is used in conjunction with the type "role," and in the second example, the type "role" is mixed with "position," which is incorrect and it's better not to mix types in professional activities. ^[If these examples are unclear, take the course "Rational Work."]

A type classifier/cognitive type machine^[Considered an ontological skill embedded in mind and body. A signal of type errors is felt physically, hence the term 'ontological jitter.' Besides this jitter, other bodily sensations such as 'thinking resonance' and a 'creative click' should also be noted in intellectual activities. For more details, read the club post: <https://systemsworld.club/t/drebezg-rezonans-shhelchok/9272>] enables fluent use of systems thinking, avoiding confusion in descriptions (modeling) and communication within complex projects. Thus, **mixing types of systems concepts**, like system, role, position, process, etc., is to be avoided. The type classifier/cognitive type machine is set during the "Rational Work" course, although some students may have had it established earlier in university, making it quickly adaptable to a new conceptual framework.