---
order: 0
title: Why and What to Learn in the Modern World
---

# Lifelong Learning: An Awareness Journey

Everyone learns throughout their life, yet not everyone recognizes this. Many do not fully comprehend the outcomes of their learning, what specifically they should learn, or what it truly means to be a student^[The answer to “How to Learn?” is covered in the course “Systems Self-Development.”]. Nevertheless, even unconscious knowledge and skills help individuals understand the world: cope with uncertainties, solve problems, and achieve goals^[Including finding life’s purpose. See the post "What is Important in Life" on the Aisystant club: <https://systemsworld.club/t/chto-v-zhizni-glavnoe/5034>.]. The pursuit of knowledge is a fundamental answer to the question, "Why learn?"

**David Deutsch's Principle of Optimism**^[Post on "About Optimism": <https://systemsworld.club/t/topic/3566>.] suggests that problems are inevitable, but it is only a lack of knowledge that prevents one from addressing them at any given moment. If we know how to solve particular problems, they cease to be problems for us. We just need to apply our existing knowledge—simply take action.

**Knowledge**^[Up-to-date and scientifically valid, not obsolete or pseudoscientific.] is predominantly acquired from **theories (disciplines)**^[Of course, practice is indispensable: "Theory without practice is dead; practice without theory is blind."], and when we apply this knowledge in real life (using certain tools for this purpose), we showcase mastery. Mastery leads to tangible changes (or creations) in the physical world.

For example, someone studies the discipline of "Accounting," and later through tools like "1C" or SAP, they demonstrate the mastery of an accountant by creating a **working product**^[A working product is a tangible result of your work. It can be represented in various ways, including writing texts, creating diagrams, developing databases, or physical objects (like a chair). Working products help you study and apply practice alongside theory, as well as track your progress and results. In specific courses or practices, the list of working products and their use is typically described in relevant materials or assignments.]—a balance sheet. Similarly, one might study "Woodworking," and then with the help of carpentry tools, create the working product—a "chair." The key point is that new physical objects have appeared in the world, and their emergence transforms the world.

The initial response to "What to learn?" is: **We must learn the best theories and master the tools** related to these disciplines to produce the best working products. Finding one’s purpose is fantastic if it results in discovering the unique talents nature has bestowed upon you. To verify these hypotheses, it’s necessary to study the corresponding theory. For instance, if you have a talent for music, music notation is essential^[Naturally, one becomes a professional through practice, practice, and more practice, but without theory, the path is overly long (and the likelihood of success much lower). It's advisable to support talent with the finest theories known to humanity, in other words, to become cultured.]. If you have a knack for getting along with people, systems management will be beneficial to becoming a leader. **Rapid and consistent progress, achieving high and stable results is impossible without a strong theoretical foundation.**

Understanding any theory requires recognizing its meta-level elements: **concepts** (terminology, definitions), **principles** (theorems, laws, models), **roles, working products, and procedures** (checklists) for creating working products, and **explanations** (proofs, clarifications, justifications). For example, in the discipline of "Accounting," there are concepts like asset, liability, accountant, and so on; roles like accountant, tax advisor; a principle of double entry; working products like a balance sheet, income statements, etc.

The next answer to "What to learn?" involves dividing knowledge (theories, disciplines) into two categories that foster:

1. **Thinking Mastery**—helps in tackling new and unforeseen problems;
2. **Applied Mastery**—addresses a specific class of tasks^[Like the professional mastery of a driver, swimmer, marketer, architect, or manager.].

For modern individuals, it is crucial to continually develop thinking mastery (intelligence) and, when necessary, develop specific applied mastery (professional skills)^[How to increase your value in the job market is discussed in a post in the club: <https://systemsworld.club/t/kak-povyshat-svoyu-czennost-na-rynke-truda-ili-pro-karla-rante-i-moniku-prodakt-menedzhera/4473>.]. That means each person is simultaneously an **intellectual and a professional** in the sense that they continuously need to address new problems using their intellect and solve a known class of tasks professionally^[A professional essentially operates on autopilot, possessing unconscious competence. For example, you clean your home or drive a car automatically. Initially, when learning a new skill, the intellect is predominantly engaged. Over time, the intellect's involvement diminishes, and more actions become automatic. This is related to the minimization of energy and attention which are limited resources.].

Even when a child learns to walk, their intellect is engaged. Once they master this skill, they exhibit applied mastery^[Hence, intellect also aids in the rapid acquisition of new applied mastery. When facing a new problem, intellect finds solutions based on existing experience and with the application of current applied mastery. Alternatively, intellect determines the need for new mastery and facilitates its quicker acquisition.]. The development of even the simplest applied mastery involves the intellect, initially relying on ingrained reflexes and genes. From there, it continually evolves as a person encounters new experiences. For example, a child goes to a store for the first time, moves to another city for studies after school, or tackles new work challenges. Typically, a person develops their intellect unconsciously.

We could certainly use formal thinking techniques and approaches when creating a car or an IT program for the first time^[However, nature did not endow us with these.]. These techniques can be learned. Currently, the best thinking techniques are encompassed in **systems thinking**.

Applied disciplines (knowledge) engage with specific physical systems that can be distinguished at different levels or scales. For instance, a therapist works with the entire body, while a neurobiologist works at the cellular level. Professionalism is the quick and effective resolution of a known class of tasks. For example, a professional swimmer can cover a certain distance, and a professional manager knows how to run an enterprise. To become a professional, it's necessary to learn a specific applied method. A swimmer learns the freestyle stroke, while a manager learns project management. It is for professionalism (rather than merely intellect) that people are compensated well, and professionals receive substantial pay and recognition. Intellect helps one become a professional more quickly. It becomes especially important when creating complex systems, or when frequent retraining is necessary, or when working in large teams.

Since we learn throughout our lives, **conscious learning** is extremely important. Therefore, it is essential for everyone to, at the most basic level, **understand the importance of knowledge acquisition, comprehend the structure of any theory, be able to select the best knowledge, and learn it quickly**.