---
order: 0
title: How Systems Thinking Helps in Professional Activities
---

# How Systems Thinking Supports Work Activities

In prior sections, we've explored the key ideas and methods of using a systems approach. Now, we'll offer general guidance on how to view any collective activity from the perspective of systems thinking. This includes breaking the world into distinct parts and interlinking them to ultimately create a successful system of interest without losing sight of the system-creator. This approach not only assists in working with a team developing the system of interest or "our system," but also in interacting^[Sometimes, this means aligning all members of different teams with each other, not just coming to terms yourself.] with other teams responsible for creating supersystems or surrounding systems, subsystems, or creation systems.

Let's begin with a brief overview of what you have already learned about using a systems approach in previous sections. Pay special attention to the second part of this description, where we'll focus on the system-creator. This further explains the essence of using a systems approach, building on concepts introduced in the "Systematicity and the use of a systems approach" subsection of Section 1, and later refined in the "Areas of Interest" subsection of Section 5.

It's time to provide a more comprehensive description, taking into account all the studied systems concepts. The logical sequence of reasoning remains unchanged. We start with the area of interest of the supersystem, assessing the world we aim to modify. Then, we move on to the system of interest and its structure, and finally, we discuss the system-creator, including creation methods, roles, and resources.

A constructor^[In entrepreneurial roles, they decide to change the world and may simultaneously aim to earn money. It’s beneficial to be aware of both, as financial aspects are often remembered, whereas the physical transformation of the world is not frequently considered.] improves the world by creating a successful system that predictably resolves specific problems (dissatisfactions) for a particular group of people (target audiences). These individuals, as the promoter assumes, will change their behavior; hence, understanding their project roles and methods, including tools, is crucial. The success of the system depends on satisfying the interests of external project roles^[These are played by people from a particular group (the target audience).], which requires assuming the function of the working system (the role of the system of interest) in its surroundings and considering the subjects of interest of project roles.

For this purpose, a product owner^[Or product manager (as a position), though, in Russian culture, they refer to systems analysts.] creates the usage concept of a system as a "black box." This helps developers create a system concept that describes the interaction of the system's functional parts^[Decomposition from the function of the working system.] and proposes its structure. It also aligns with spatial layout and evaluates the total cost of ownership of the system^[Total cost of ownership includes the time of system operation described in the usage concept, as well as the system creation time, which is a cost description of the system as a "transparent box"]. These concepts are also used by visionaries to decide on the marketability of launching this system of interest.

Alongside developers, architects who regard the system as a "transparent box" focus on subjects of interest^[These are the so-called “-ilities” or architectural characteristics of a system (subjects of interest), like availability, continuity, performance, recoverability, reliability and safety, resilience, scalability, configurability, extensibility, installability, reusability, localization, maintainability, portability, supportability, upgradeability. Moreover, architects utilize four key "continuity of everything” metrics: deployment frequency; lead time for changes; change failure rate; time to restore service.], determining the principles for modular system division and connection organization among them. The collection of such architectural decisions is known as the system's architecture. According to the classic systems approach 3.0, it's the outcome of evaluating numerous conflicts between system levels^[Architects are compelled to make the least bad decisions since good solutions won't exist because, per classic systems approach 3.0, stability is a fantasy; conversely, the world is full of misalignments. Therefore, problems will inevitably emerge from a higher or lower system level.].

Following the principle of continuity of everything^[The principle of continuity is detailed in the subsection "Increment and Iteration."], the architect strives to organize autonomous teams within creation systems to release system increments for maximum unrelated modules. The overall team endeavors to achieve detailed descriptions of all systems^[Remember, multiple systems are described in the project, not just the system of interest. Some teams may also need to produce subsystems, while others focus on creation systems.] with precision sufficient for producing the system of interest on a chosen production platform. They aim to create^[It's preferable to produce an MVP, not an ideal system immediately.] it using methods proposed by technologists and DevOps. Subsequently, the system undergoes operation, repeating its processes for the improvement of certain parts^[Incremental development as opposed to iterative.] or for its full alteration, or for subsystem changes, or for launching other systems of interest.

For all this, an effective system-creator (most often an organization or enterprise) is essential. To develop and sustain production platforms (until they become self-sustaining), entrepreneurs draw on investor resources, and they are concerned with the overall success of the enterprise.

Thinking about the system-creator is structured similarly—its functional parts consist of project roles (organizational roles) that execute various tasks following methods^[Including methods for describing different systems, including the system-creator, which must also be described.], and its constructive parts are organizational units. Company employees in different project roles carry out tasks using specific methods (practices), as if positioned on an assembly line (with other agents, including other enterprises, AI, and equipment). This production activity is managed by an operations manager^[An operations manager is a member of the "managers" class. Moreover, this class distinguishes a manager responsible for external relations (public relations or government relations), who ensures the satisfaction of the interests of external project roles interested in the enterprise's activities, such as tax authorities, environmentalists, or community representatives. Additionally, an administrator is designated, who oversees the administrative "assembly line," which includes departments like accounting, HR, etc.]. The conveyor's creation or organization is initiated by the Chief Transformation Officer^[This can be a separate position, or a CIO might simultaneously serve as the Chief Transformation Officer.]. They may commence development projects for the system-creator amid the creation or continuous development of the system of interest, to reconfigure the current production platform.

Systems thinking about changing the physical world involves recursion at many levels and for diverse systems. Within your project activities or enterprise, it's not only about creating and developing the system of interest (with its subsystems) but also about creating and developing the system-creator. In greater measure, it pertains to the perpetual development process, for which we require systems concepts and specific thinking mastery.

It's possible that this description^[This is a lens, a convenient way to examine any activity.] of applying systems thinking isn't fully clear to you; however, a complete picture will emerge as you progress through the main AISYSTANT program. You likely found the first part of this text clear, while the second part, discussing the system-creator, remains somewhat perplexing. We'll decode this second part in this section. 

[ ^1 ] Sometimes, this means aligning all members of different teams with each other, not just coming to terms yourself.
[ ^2 ] In entrepreneurial roles, they decide to change the world and may simultaneously aim to earn money. It’s beneficial to be aware of both, as financial aspects are often remembered, whereas the physical transformation of the world is not frequently considered.
[ ^3 ] These are played by people from a particular group (the target audience).
[ ^4 ] Or product manager (as a position), though, in Russian culture, they refer to systems analysts.
[ ^5 ] Decomposition from the function of the working system.
[ ^6 ] Total cost of ownership includes the time of system operation described in the usage concept, as well as the system creation time, which is a cost description of the system as a "transparent box."
[ ^7 ] These are the so-called “-ilities” or architectural characteristics of a system (subjects of interest), like availability, continuity, performance, recoverability, reliability and safety, resilience, scalability, configurability, extensibility, installability, reusability, localization, maintainability, portability, supportability, upgradeability. Moreover, architects utilize four key "continuity of everything” metrics: deployment frequency; lead time for changes; change failure rate; time to restore service.
[ ^8 ] Architects are compelled to make the least bad decisions since good solutions won't exist because, per classic systems approach 3.0, stability is a fantasy; conversely, the world is full of misalignments. Therefore, problems will inevitably emerge from a higher or lower system level.
[ ^9 ] The principle of continuity is detailed in the subsection "Increment and Iteration."
[ ^10 ] Remember, multiple systems are described in the project, not just the system of interest. Some teams may also need to produce subsystems, while others focus on creation systems.
[ ^11 ] It's preferable to produce an MVP, not an ideal system immediately.
[ ^12 ] Incremental development as opposed to iterative.
[ ^13 ] Including methods for describing different systems, including the system-creator, which must also be described.
[ ^14 ] An operations manager is a member of the "managers" class. Moreover, this class distinguishes a manager responsible for external relations (public relations or government relations), who ensures the satisfaction of the interests of external project roles interested in the enterprise's activities, such as tax authorities, environmentalists, or community representatives. Additionally, an administrator is designated, who oversees the administrative "assembly line," which includes departments like accounting, HR, etc.
[ ^15 ] This can be a separate position, or a CIO might simultaneously serve as the Chief Transformation Officer.
[ ^16 ] This is a lens, a convenient way to examine any activity.