---
order: 2
title: "Method (Practice) \u2013 A Discipline and Tools"
---

# Method (Practice) – A Discipline and Tools

In systems thinking, a practice or method can be seen as a combination of discipline and tools that support that discipline. Accordingly, a practice established within an enterprise involves agents proficient in both theory and tools, performing specific roles. It’s important to note that individuals must study the discipline and train in using the tools.

For instance, disciplines include accounting, the theory of hairdressing, marketing, and operational management (typically books are written on such disciplines). A discipline is studied or “placed” in the mind, while tools are additionally mastered or trained for use. Unlike disciplines, tools are represented in the physical world^[A discipline is an object of mental space, but it can be described on some physical medium.]. A tool is a device or object that helps create a work artifact. In the examples given, tools include scissors and the SAP software system (1C: Accounting). The tools are embedded with a specific discipline^[Therefore, if you're developing a technology, it's likely to be used by a role as a tool in accordance with a specific discipline. As the developer of this tool, you should be well-versed in the discipline that the role will utilize in using this tool.].

For example, a person adopting the role of an accountant learns the theory of accounting and masters SAP as a tool for accounting. When assigned a task, they assume the role of an accountant and, through the practice of accounting, create a balance sheet and an income statement. These documents are work artifacts produced according to the rules outlined in accounting theory. The 1C program supports this theory and helps create work artifacts. The SAP (1C) development team must include not only programmers but also highly qualified accountants.

Incidentally, SAP could be replaced with other tools like Excel and Word. The theory remains unchanged, but the tool varies. Consider reflecting on the discipline and tools concerning your professional methods (practices).

Any organization can be viewed as a combination of numerous methods. Just as there are no identical people because everyone has distinct genetic combinations, there are no identical organizations. Every enterprise has its unique combination of practices, and this unique set determines its competitiveness and, consequently, its survivability. As organizations evolve, they may discover and formalize new ways of working, which then get replicated like genes. Other enterprises adopt and implement these best practices, essentially transferring memes.

Each area of interest in the Table 3x3 employs its methods of organization. This pertains to describing the target audience, attracting investors, defining the architecture, or outlining the creation systems. Each cell in the Table 3x3 requires corresponding methods for its respective work artifacts. If you have outstanding architectural practices but poor marketing ones (or vice versa), your enterprise is unlikely to be competitive. The Table 3x3 is a reminder of the essential practices needed in an organization, and it allows you to highlight cells where you excel with market-leading practices and those areas where your practices are satisfactory.

Competitiveness is achieved by being the best in some areas, while in all other areas of interest, you perform satisfactorily relative to the market. However, if there's a significant weakness, even your best practices may become ineffective. Similarly, if all areas are performing at a moderate level, colloquially termed as “average,” you’re unlikely to become a market leader.

Therefore, focusing on organizational methods is a crucial part of the Chief Transformation Officer's work, particularly in the role of an organizational designer. This role involves developing the organization's concept (as a system), defining functional roles and their interactions, and designing changes within the organization. Organizational designers also may be responsible for defining the authorities and responsibilities of organizational units and preparing organizational projects.