---
order: 8
title: 'About Communication: Form vs. Content'
---

# On Communication: Form vs. Content

Systems thinking is extremely valuable for large teams, especially when organizing work among specialists from different fields. Systems thinking takes place among people and is meant to help them communicate with each other [ ^1 ]. Therefore, let's focus on communication.

In any communication, there is an exchange of information, involving both the form in which it is presented and the content being conveyed. Everyone can notice what they respond to more. To illustrate the concept of "form vs. content," let's assume that an average person pays 80% attention to the form and only 20% to the content [ ^2 ].

A focused person can change this ratio by concentrating on the content, for instance, by understanding from which role the person is speaking. A focused individual manages their attention by consciously concentrating on the concepts and theories used by their conversation partner. A layperson is guided by intuition, which means they mainly evaluate communication through the "fight-flight" response. They may be offended by the form without delving into the content, which could potentially improve their life.

If the brain is not trained to extract content, the natural mode is activated—paying more attention to the psychological and emotional aspects. Form is read more quickly and doesn't require much effort. Through form, one can indirectly judge content. However, it's crucial to see the essence behind the form and understand the content, even under the most unfavorable conditions. This is a separate role-based mastery that must be acquired. Ordinary people might gain it with age if they're lucky. But it's better to be aware of it and systematically develop it.

Students might complain about a teacher who delivers information in a dull and uninteresting way. While we don't excuse the teacher, what should a student do? They need the knowledge. They'll have to exercise their role-based mastery: taking control of the natural mode (focusing on form) and striving to focus on content, sometimes even pushing through the desperate urge to give up. It's better to follow the principle: "Nothing personal, just role interest."

You can train your role-based mastery through practice, but you also need to understand the theory of roles, focused attention (managing attention), ontology, and logic (being aware of the subject area with its concepts and terms). Start applying this technique of separating form and content in communication.

Let's focus on several examples of the importance of content in the communication process:

1. In communication, it is important to adhere to grounding principles. Grounding, or 'earthing,' means connection to the physical world. During communication, you convey some description of the world (systems), so it's necessary to ground your descriptions. This will increase the chances of being understood. It is important to tie abstract concepts and descriptions to specific situations in the physical world. If abstract concepts are mentioned, you can ask for examples of situations to which these concepts apply. This will help avoid confusion and ensure clearer understanding. See grounding examples in the modeling exercises.
2. Every person views a system (has a specific interest) or models a particular situation based on their worldview. Even if a person is unaware of it, they still rely on some theory (that they have studied) or on common understanding (folk wisdom, memes, experience, or upbringing). To agree with them, pay attention to their ontology (the concepts they use) [ ^3 ], but also ensure the creation of an appropriate form of communication. Additionally, ontological thinking will help you not confuse the types by which all words are marked. For example, the type of words "Paris," "London," "Beijing" is a city, so the phrase "I visited Paris, London, and China" sounds jarring. This is because it uses different word types, specifically "city" and "country." In systems thinking, it's also important not to confuse types, such as "systems" and "processes," by calling the process of cleaning a room a system or saying that "a manager plays the role of an engineer" [ ^4 ].
3. Corporate culture is built on values, mission, behavioral norms, traditions, and theories adopted in these organizations. But at the base of any culture lies language, and this language reflects the practices and knowledge adopted by the entire team. Therefore, it is crucial to pay attention to the concepts you use personally and those used by your company’s staff. To develop systems thinking, it is essential first to master the systems language, learn to speak it fluently, use it in communication, and integrate it into your corporate culture.
4. When we talk about a course, we focus on the form of content delivery. This form can be discussed separately and in detail. For example, a course can be presented as a textbook or as an online course in text or video format. Note that we haven’t yet discussed the course content. It could be about management, marketing, or freestyle swimming. Keep in mind that the content of any course is a particular discipline (theory) or several related disciplines. For example, in systems thinking courses [ ^5 ], the discipline of "systems thinking" is not taught; instead, several transdisciplines of the intellect stack are studied. From all the transdisciplines in the intellect stack, concepts and principles are selected that allow describing and developing approaches to partitioning the world into different systems and subsystems (identifying systems and subsystems).

[ ^1 ]: This applies not only to the team but also to all interested parties.
[ ^2 ]: These numbers are conditional.
[ ^3 ]: It is recommended to take the "Rational Work" course before the "Systems Thinking" course.
[ ^4 ]: One could say that John Doe, who is a manager, also sometimes plays the role of an engineer. In systems thinking, it is essential not to confuse types; otherwise, it will be impossible to carry out modeling and communication in a large team.
[ ^5 ]: In this context, when you hear the words "systems thinking," it is quite possible that someone means they are taking a course of the same name. Though, of course, it is more likely that the discussion involves thinking with the concept of a "system" and other concepts from the transdisciplines of the intellect stack.