---
order: 5
title: Classical Systems Approach 1.0
---

# Classical Systems Approach 1.0

At the core of the systems approach lies the concept of a "system." With this concept, a constructor thinks about the world of objects or things^[Do not confuse the physical world with the mental space. A person is an object of the physical world, while the concept of "age" is an abstract object.]. Here, an analogy can be drawn with physics, where the term "physical body" is introduced. This denotes a material object having mass, shape, and volume. Subsequently, in physics, all discussions and laws relate to this physical body, and when physical laws are applied practically, the "physical body" is replaced by the corresponding material object: a road, a chair, a rocket, or an engine piston.

The same applies to the concept of a "system." Every professional works with their own systems. For some, a system could be a house, a computer program, or a trained artificial intelligence; for others, it might be a child ready for adult life or a cultivated tree or grove. Every person, consciously or unconsciously, creates systems. A system constructor does this consciously, relying on various systems methodologies.

In specific projects, "systems" are identified from the physical world through the focus of an individual or team. Systems thinking is the ability to identify, describe, and create systems^[By engaging professionals in applied methods.], as well as undertaking certain actions with them. The systems approach offers methodologies based on the concept of a "system" to develop systems thinking. There are several generations of the systems approach, each containing different methodologies^[Although all systems methodologies are based on the concept of a "system," they may use their own unique set of concepts. Besides the difference in the set of concepts, methodologies vary by generations within the systems approach.]. What unites methodologies of each generation is the concept of a "system."

In the first version of the systems approach^[There exist several methodologies, the founders of which include Alexander Bogdanov, Edward de Bono, Peter Drucker, Alfred Chandler, and others.], formed by L. von Bertalanffy, systems are viewed as objects representing a specific class. Consider the system "clock." Note that this is an ideal (even though we imagine the clock as physical), rather than a specific physical object you could point to. We are not talking about a wristwatch or a clock on a space station. Objective consideration of systems assumed systems as objects discussed independently of subjects. Therefore, within Systems Approach 1.0, one could discuss just a clock, a table, or a car, and find different properties within these systems—integrity, emergence, nestedness. The classic approach predominantly examines these three properties of any system.

A person cannot view the entire world simultaneously; there is not enough computational capacity in the brain. By focusing attention, one distinguishes significant aspects from reality, while trying not to lose touch with the world as a whole—that is, not losing context. The concept of a "system" aids in managing attention, which is why sometimes it is said that systems thinking is the ability to manage attention.

The property of "integrity" implies that a system has a boundary, and the interconnection between its parts is much stronger than with other objects of physical reality. This property helps in defining systems through focus. In simple objects like a table or a car, boundary issues do not arise, but when considering complex systems (such as an airport or university), determining boundaries becomes challenging. It's difficult to understand what constitutes a water safety system, a pass issuance system, or a heating system. More on complex systems later.

The second crucial property of a system is emergence. In English, "emerge" means appearance. Emergence signifies a new property (function) appearing in a system that did not exist in any of its individual parts. For instance, an engine, chassis, and cabin together constitute the system of a car, which gains the function of moving with a passenger. None of the car's parts individually has this function. It arises when all its subsystems are combined. Any system possesses the property of emergence, and if it lacks such a function, it is not a system.

The third property of classic systems is nestedness^[We will discuss the nestedness of physical systems within each other. This nestedness relationship between two physical objects as "part-whole" differs from the relationships "class-member of class" and "superclass-subclass."]. Nestedness can be envisioned like a matryoshka doll: one system fits within another, which serves as its supersystem. The property of nestedness means that any system is a supersystem for some subsystems and also fits into a larger supersystem. If we say we have a system, it automatically has subsystems and a supersystem.

All three aforementioned properties of the classical systems approach aid in identifying necessary objects from the physical world, maintaining attention on the system itself, and, if needed, examining its configuration (subsystems), as well as retaining the system's connection to the physical world (supersystem).

Consider the example of the system “clock.” Firstly, this system can always be imagined in the physical world. A clock possesses the property of integrity, having a boundary. A clock has the emergent property, that is, its function—to show time. This function only appears when all parts of the clock are assembled. None of the clock's parts individually has this property. Nestedness is manifested in that each element of the clock is part of the entire system. Simultaneously, the clock face itself also has subsystems. Each subsystem will have its own properties of integrity, emergence, nestedness.

Thus, the classical systems approach establishes a specific way of thinking or worldview through the properties of a system, and we will employ this cognitive technique in the following generations of the systems approach 2.0 and 3.0.