---
order: 8
title: 'On Communication: Form vs. Content'
---

# On Communication: Form vs. Content

Systems thinking is extremely beneficial for large teams, particularly when it’s necessary to organize the efforts of specialists from various professions. Systems thinking operates between individuals and is designed to help them reach agreements. [ ^1 ] Consequently, let's turn our focus to communication.

In any communication, there is an exchange of information, involving both the transmission and the reception of data. In this exchange, we can distinguish between the form of delivery and the content being communicated. Everyone will notice for themselves what they react to more. To illustrate the "form vs. content" idea, let's assume that a typical person focuses 80% of their attention on form and only 20% on content. [ ^2 ]

A focused individual can reverse this ratio by concentrating on the content, such as understanding the role from which a person speaks. A focused person controls their attention, consciously concentrating on the concepts and theories their conversation partner uses. The average person, guided by intuition, primarily assesses communication through a "fight-or-flight" lens. They might take offense at the form without delving into the content that could positively change their life.

If the brain isn't trained to extract content, the natural mode is activated—paying more attention to the psychological-emotional aspect. Form is processed more quickly and doesn’t require much effort. The form can indirectly suggest the content. Nevertheless, it’s important to see the essence behind the form and to grasp the content, even under the most unfavorable conditions of its reception. This requires a specific role-based mastery that needs to be acquired. Ordinary individuals may gain it with age, but it's better to know about it and attempt to develop it systematically.

Students might complain about a teacher who delivers information in a dull and uninteresting way. We’re not excusing the teacher, but still, what should the student do? After all, they need the knowledge. They will need to hone their role-based mastery: taking control over the natural mode (where they focus on form) and striving to engage with the content. Sometimes, this involves fighting through the desperate urge to give up. It's better to adhere to the principle: “Nothing personal, just role interest.”

You can train your role-based mastery with practice, but it’s essential to understand the theory of roles, focus (attention management), ontology, and logic (awareness of the domain with its concepts and terms). Start using this technique of separating form from content in communication.

Let's look at a few examples of the importance of content in the communication process:

1. In communication, it's crucial to follow the principles of grounding. Grounding means anchoring to the physical world. During communication, you convey a description of the world (systems), so it’s essential to ground your descriptions. This increases the chances of being understood. It's important to tie abstract concepts and descriptions to specific situations in the physical world. If abstract concepts are mentioned, you can ask for examples of situations to which these concepts are applicable. This helps avoid confusion and ensures clearer understanding. See grounding examples in the modeling exercises.

2. Every person views a system (has certain interests) or models a particular situation based on their worldview. Even if a person doesn't realize it, they are still relying on some theory (which they have studied) or on common understanding (folk wisdom, memes, experience, or upbringing). To reach an agreement with them, pay attention to their ontology (used concepts) [ ^3 ], while ensuring the creation of appropriate communication forms. Additionally, ontological thinking will help you avoid confusing types that label all words. For example, the type of words "Paris," "London," "Beijing" is a city, so the phrase "I visited Paris, London, and China" will jar the ear. This is because it uses different types of words—namely "city" type and "country" type. In systems thinking, it's also crucial not to confuse types, for example, "systems" and "processes," such as calling the process of cleaning a room a system, or saying that "a manager plays the role of an engineer." [ ^4 ] 

3. Corporate culture is based on values, mission, behavior norms, traditions, and theories adopted in these organizations. However, the foundation of any culture is language, reflecting the practices and knowledge adopted by the entire team. Therefore, it is important to pay attention to the concepts that you and your colleagues use. To establish systems thinking, it’s necessary to first master the systems language. Learn to speak it fluently, use it in communication, and integrate it into your corporate culture.

4. When we discuss a course, we focus on the form of content delivery. We can separately and thoroughly discuss this form. For example, a course can be structured as a textbook or an online course in text or video format. Notice that we haven't said anything yet about the course’s content. It could be about management, marketing, or freestyle swimming. Keep in mind that the content of any course is a particular discipline (theory) or several related disciplines. For example, in systems thinking courses, [ ^5 ] the discipline of "systems thinking" isn’t taught; instead, several transdisciplines from the intellect stack are studied. From all the transdisciplines in the intellect stack, certain concepts and principles are selected that allow for describing and developing techniques (approaches) for dividing the world into different systems and subsystems (identifying systems and subsystems).

[ ^1 ]: This refers not just to the team but to all stakeholders.  
[ ^2 ]: These figures are hypothetical.  
[ ^3 ]: For this, it is recommended to take the "Rational Work" course before the "Systems Thinking" course.  
[ ^4 ]: It can be stated that John Doe, a manager, sometimes also plays the role of an engineer. In systems thinking, it’s important not to confuse types, or conducting modeling and communication in a large team will be impossible.  
[ ^5 ]: In this context, when you hear the words "systems thinking," it’s quite possible that someone is referring to taking a course of the same name. However, it’s most likely that they’re talking about thinking using the concept of 'system' and other concepts from the transdisciplines of the intellect stack.