---
title: How systems thinking helps in work activities
---

In the previous sections, we looked at the main ideas **and techniques of the systems approach.** Now let's provide general explanations on how to view any collective activity from the perspective of systems thinking. This means how to cut the world into separate parts and how to connect them with each other, in order to eventually create a successful system of interest and not lose sight of the creating system. This will help you not only work in a team that creates a system of interest or "our system", but also interact^[Sometimes even negotiate with all team members of different teams among themselves, not just with yourself.] with other teams that create supersystems or systems in the environment, subsystems, or creating systems.

Let's start with a brief description of what you have already learned in previous sections about the systems approach. Pay special attention to the second part of the following description, where the system of the creator is discussed. This continues the description of the essence of the systems approach, the beginning of which was proposed in the subsection "Systematicity and Systemness" in section 1, and later clarified in the subsection "Areas of Interest" in section 5.

Now it's time to give a more complete description taking into account all the studied system concepts. The logical sequence of reasoning does not change. We begin with the area of interest in the supersystem, that is, looking at the world we want to change somehow. Then we move on to the system of interest and its structure. And then we discuss the creating system, including creation methods, roles, and resources.

The **Actor**^[In entrepreneurial roles, he decides to change the world, while simultaneously deciding to earn money. Both should be realized because we often don't forget about money, but don't particularly think about physical world changes.] changes the world for the better by creating a **successful system** that predictably solves certain **problems** (dissatisfactions) of a certain group of people (target audiences). These people, as the **promoter** assumes, will change their behavior, so it is important to understand their **project roles and** **methods**, including **tools**. The success of the system depends on the satisfaction of the **interests** of **external project** **roles**^[Which are played by people from a certain group (target audience).], and to do this, it is necessary to assume the **function** of a working system (the role of the system of interest) in its **environment** and consider the **subjects of interests** of project roles.

For this, the **product** **owner**^[Or product manager (as a title), although in Russian culture they talk about systems analysts.] creates a **concept of use** of the system as a "black box". This helps **developers** make a **system concept**, which describes interactions of **functional parts** of the system^[Decomposition from the function of a working system.] and proposes its **design**. It is also linked with **spatial layout** and the assessment of **total cost of ownership** of the system^[Total cost of ownership considers system exploitation time described in the concept of use, as well as the time for system creation, i.e., cost description of the system as a "transparent box".]. These concepts are also used by the **visionary** to make decisions about the commercial effectiveness of market entry with this system of interest.

Along with developers, the system as a "transparent box" interests **architects**, who, based on the subjects of interests^[So-called "--ilities/-ities," such as architectural characteristics of the system (subjects of interests) like availability, continuity, performance, recovery capability, reliability, security, resilience, scalability, configurability, expandability, installability, reusability, localization, maintainability, portability, supportability, upgradeability. Also, architects use 4 key metrics of "continuity of everything": deployment frequency; change lead time; change failure rate; recovery time.], determine principles for dividing the system into modules and organizing links between them. This set of architectural decisions is called the **system architecture**, which is achieved according to the **systems** **approach** **3.0** as a result of evaluating many conflicts between **system levels**^[Architects have to choose the least bad solutions, as there will be no good ones, because according to the systems approach 3.0, you can't dream of stability, on the contrary, the world is full of instabilities. Therefore, a problem is sure to come from a higher or lower system level.].

Guided by the **principle of continuity of everything**,^[This principle will be explained in more detail in the subsection "Increment and Iteration".] the architect attempts to organize autonomous teams of creating systems for releasing **increments** of the system for maximally unrelated modules. The general team strives to achieve detailed descriptions of all systems^[Don't forget that several systems are described in the project at once, not just the system of interest. Some teams will also need to create subsystems, and others even creating systems.] with sufficient precision for the manufacturing of the **system of interest** on the chosen **production platform**, --- and manufacture^[Preferably to make an MVP, not immediately an ideal system.] it using the methods proposed by **technologists** and **DevOps**. Then the **operation of the system** occurs, repeatedly repeating everything done to improve some parts of the system^[Incremental development instead of iterative.], or even for its complete change, or changing subsystems, or for the release of other systems of interest.

For all this, an effective **creating system** is necessary (most often -- an organization, an enterprise). For development and current activities of the production platform (until break-even), the **businessman** attracts investor resources, and he is interested in the success of the entire enterprise.

Thinking about the creating system is arranged similarly --- **functional parts** **in it --- are** **project roles** **(orgrules)**, which perform various works by **methods**^[Including methods for describing different systems, including the creating system. It also needs to be described.]**, and** **constructive parts** --- **orglinks**. Enterprise employees in different project roles perform **works** according to specific methods (practices), as if on a production conveyor (with other agents, including other enterprises, AI, equipment). This production activity is led by the **operations manager**^[The operations manager is an instance of the class "managers". We also highlight in this class the manager of relations with the environment (public relations or government relations), who monitors the satisfaction of the interests of external project roles concerned with the activities of the enterprise. For example, tax authorities, environmentalists, or public representatives. And we also highlight the administrator, who is responsible for the administrative conveyor, i.e., the work of such services as accounting, HR, etc.]. And the creation initiates or organizes the conveyor -- **development director**^[This may be a separate title or the person in the role of CIO may simultaneously be the development director.]. He can also launch a **development project** of the creating system during the creation and/or continuous development of the system of interest in order to restructure the current production platform.

Systems thinking about changing the physical world proceeds **recursively at many levels and for various systems**. Within the framework of your project activities or your enterprise, it may concern the creation and development not only of a system of interest (with its subsystems) but also the creation and development of a creating system. Even more, it concerns an endless process of development, for the systematic organization of which we need system concepts and certain thinking techniques.

Maybe the presented description^[That is, this is some prism through which it is convenient to look at any activity.] of the application of systems thinking is not entirely clear to you, but the full picture will form as you go through the main AISYSTANT program. Most likely, the first part of this text was well understood by you, and the second part, where the system of the creator was discussed, was not completely clear. We will work on the decryption of this second part in this section.