---
title: Method (Practice) – is a discipline and tools
---

A practice or method in systems thinking can be represented as a combination of **discipline and** **tools** that support this discipline. Accordingly, **a practice implemented in an enterprise is carried out by agents knowledgeable in theory and** **tools**, **fulfilling certain roles.** Note that people must learn the discipline and train in mastering the tools.

Disciplines, for example, include accounting or hairdressing theory, as well as marketing or operations management (textbooks are usually written about disciplines). A discipline is studied or "placed" in the mind, while tools are additionally mastered or trained for use. Tools, unlike disciplines, are present in the physical world^[A discipline is an object of the mental space, but it can be described on some physical medium.]. A tool is a device or object that helps create a work artifact. In the given examples, tools include scissors and the software system SAP (1C accounting). Specific discipline is "embedded within" tools^[Therefore, if you develop a technology, it is likely to be used by a certain role in accordance with a specific discipline as a tool. And you, as the developer of this tool, should be well-versed in the discipline for which the role will use the tool.].

For instance, a person learning to play the role of an accountant studies accounting theory and masters SAP as a tool for accounting. When tasked with work, they assume the role of an accountant and, using the practice of accounting, create a balance sheet and income statements. These documents are work artifacts created according to the rules set out in accounting theory. And the 1C program supports this theory and helps create work artifacts. The SAP (1C) development team must include not only programmers but also highly qualified accountants.

Incidentally, other tools like Excel and Word could be used instead of SAP. In this case, the theory does not change; only the tool does. Try to reflect on the discipline and tools relevant to your professional methods (practices).

Any organization can be viewed as a combination or mix of numerous methods. No two people are the same due to their unique genetic makeup, and similarly, no two organizations are alike. Each enterprise has its unique set of practices that define its competitiveness and, correspondingly, its survival. During organizational development, new ways of working may be discovered and formalized, which can then be replicated, akin to genes. Other enterprises adopt and integrate best practices, effectively passing down memes.

**Methods specific to the organization are applied in each area of interest** **3x3 Table.** This applies to the description of the target audience, investor attraction, architecture, or creating systems definitions. Corresponding methods are needed for the work artifacts in each cell of the 3x3 Table. If you have excellent architectural practices but poor marketing practices (or vice versa), your **enterprise is unlikely to be competitive**. The 3x3 Table helps to remember which practices are necessary in an organization and also allows you to highlight cells for which you have the best market practices and which areas are satisfactory.

Competitiveness is achieved because your organization is the best in some areas, while in all other areas of interest, you perform satisfactorily relative to the market. But if there is a failure somewhere, even your best practices may be useless. Similarly, if all your areas are more or less in a steady state, what is called "a four," you are unlikely to become a market leader.

Therefore, attention to organizational methods is an important part of the work of the **development director, specifically in the role of** **organizational designer**. They develop the concept of the organization (as a system), define functional roles and their interactions, and design changes in the organization. Organizational designers may also be responsible for defining the authority and responsibility of organizational units and preparing the organizational project.