---
order: 8
title: 'About Communication: Form vs. Content'
---

### Systems Thinking: Key to Effective Team Collaboration

Systems thinking is immensely valuable for large teams, especially when integrating professionals from various fields. **Systems thinking is actualized between individuals;** it aims to **foster agreements** among them^ [Not just within the team, but also with all stakeholders.]. Given this, let's focus on communication.

In any communication, there is **exchange and reception of information.** This exchange consists of both the presentation form and the content conveyed. People often recognize which aspect they're more responsive to. To illustrate the idea of "form versus content," let's assume a typical person pays 80% attention to form and only 20% to content^ [These figures are approximate.].

A focused person might reverse this ratio by concentrating on the content. For instance, by understanding the role from which a person speaks. **A focused individual manages their attention,** consciously concentrating on the concepts and theories used by their conversation partner. Meanwhile, an average person relies on intuition, evaluating communication through a "fight-or-flight" lens. They might take offense at the form without delving into the content, which could positively transform their life.

If the brain isn't trained to extract content, it defaults to a **natural mode**—focusing more on the psycho-emotional aspect. The form is processed quickly and without much effort. The form can indirectly inform the content, but it's crucial to peer beyond it and understand the substance, even under the most challenging circumstances. Achieving this requires acquiring a specific role mastery. Ordinary people might develop this with age, but it's better to be aware of it and attempt to develop it systematically.

Students might complain about a teacher who delivers information in a dull and unengaging manner. Without defending the teacher, what should the student do? After all, they need the knowledge. It involves honing **role mastery:** gaining control over the natural mode (focusing on form) and striving to engage with the content. Sometimes, it even entails fighting the strong urge to give up. It's wise to follow the principle: “Nothing personal, only the role interest.”

To train your role mastery, practice is essential, but you must also understand theories about roles, concentration (attention management), ontology, and logic (understanding the subject area with its concepts and terms). Begin using this **technique of separating form and content** in your communications.

Let's examine some examples underscoring the importance of content in the communication process:

1. In communication, adhere to the **principles of grounding.** Grounding means anchoring to the physical world. During communication, you transmit a description of the world (systems), so it's essential to ground your descriptions. This increases the likelihood of being understood. It's crucial to link abstract notions and descriptions to specific situations in the physical world. If abstract concepts are used, ask for examples of situations where these concepts apply. This helps avoid confusion and ensures clearer understanding. Check assignments on modeling for examples of grounding.
   
2. Every person views a system (holds a specific interest) or models a specific situation based on their worldview. Even if they aren't aware, they rely on some theory (studied or acquired through wisdom, memes, experience, or upbringing) or common understanding. To reach an agreement, pay attention to their **ontology** (the concepts they use)^ [The course "Rational Work" is recommended before "Systems Thinking"]. while also ensuring the appropriate form of communication. Furthermore, ontological thinking helps prevent type confusion, where words are tagged with types. For example, "Paris," "London," and "Beijing" are cities, so saying "I've visited Paris, London, and China" sounds off. This mix-up involves the city type and country type. Similarly, in systems thinking, it's crucial not to confuse types, for instance, labeling a cleaning process as a "system" or saying “a manager plays the role of an engineer”^ [You might say that John, a manager, sometimes acts as an engineer. Type accuracy is crucial in systems thinking for effective modeling and communication within large teams.].

3. **Corporate culture** stands on values, mission, behavior norms, traditions, and theories accepted in these organizations. At the core of any culture lies language, which reflects the practices and knowledge adopted by the entire team. Hence, attention must be given to the concepts you and your company personnel use. To instill systems thinking, mastering the systems language is a priority. Learn to speak it fluently, incorporate it into communications, and embed it into your corporate culture.

4. When discussing a **course**, we focus on the form of content delivery. This form can be separately and thoroughly discussed. For instance, a course may be presented as a textbook or an online course in text or video format. Note that we've not yet touched upon the course content. It might cover management, marketing, or swimming technique. Remember that any course content is a particular discipline (theory) or several interconnected disciplines. For example, in systems thinking courses^ [When you hear "systems thinking," someone might be referring to this course, though it primarily refers to the thinking style using the "system" concept and other interdisciplinary elements of the intelligence stack.], no "systems thinking" discipline is taught outright. Instead, multiple transdisciplines from the intelligence stack are explored. Concepts and principles are selected from these transdisciplines to describe and develop methods (approaches) for dividing the world into different systems and subsystems (identifying systems and subsystems).