---
order: 5
title: Classic Systems Approach 1.0
---

At the core of the systems approach lies the concept of the "system." **Using systems, a thinker contemplates the world of objects and/or things**^[Do not confuse the physical world with mental space. A person belongs to the physical world, while the concept of "age" is an abstract entity.]**.** This can be likened to physics, where the concept of a "physical body" is introduced, referring to a material object with mass, shape, and volume. In physics, all reasoning and laws are tied to the physical body, and when these laws are applied in practice, the "physical body" is replaced by a corresponding material object: a road, chair, rocket, or engine piston.

The same applies to the concept of a "system." Every professional works with their own systems. For some, the system might be a house, a computer program, or trained artificial intelligence; for others, it might be a child ready for adulthood, or a cultivated tree or grove. Every person, consciously or unconsciously, creates systems. **A system thinker does this consciously, relying on various systems methodologies.** 

In specific projects, "systems" are identified from the physical world by the focus of an individual or team. Systems thinking is the ability to identify, describe, and create systems^[Utilizing professionals in applied methods.], as well as to perform specific actions with them. **The systems approach offers methodologies based on the concept of a "system"** **to develop systems thinking.** There are several generations of the systems approach, each containing different methodologies^[Although all systems methodologies are based on the concept of a "system," they may use their unique set of concepts. Besides differences in concepts, methodologies are also distinguished by the generations of the systems approach.]. What unites all methodologies of each generation is the presence of the concept of a "system."

In the **first version of the systems approach**^[There are several methodologies established by Alexander Bogdanov, Edward de Bono, Peter Drucker, Alfred Chandler, and others.]**, developed by** **L. von** **Bertalanffy**, systems are viewed as objects representing a specific class. Consider the system of "a clock." Note that this is an idealized concept (even though we imagine clocks as physical), not a specific physical object you can point to. We are not talking about wristwatches or watches on a space station. The objective view of systems implied that systems are objects and were discussed independently of subjects. Therefore, in systems approach 1.0, you could discuss just clocks, tables, or cars, and identify different properties in these systems – **wholeness, emergence, and hierarchy.** The classical approach mainly focuses on these three properties of any system.

A person cannot simultaneously view the entire world; the brain's computational power is insufficient. By directing attention, one abstracts significant elements from reality while trying not to lose their connection to the broader context. The concept of a "system" helps manage this attention, which is why systems thinking is sometimes described as the ability to manage attention.

The property of **"wholeness"** implies that a system has boundaries, and the connections between the parts of the system are much stronger than with other objects in physical reality. This property helps focus attention on the system. For simple objects like a table or a car, boundaries are obvious, but identifying boundaries in complex systems (like an airport or a university) is challenging. It isn't easy to define what constitutes a water security system, a pass issuance system, or a heating system. We will discuss complex systems in detail later.

The second important property of a system is **emergence**. In English, "emerge" implies appearance. Emergence means that the system exhibits a new property (function) that none of its individual parts possesses. For example, an engine, chassis, and cabin come together to form the system of a car, which then gains the function of transporting passengers. None of the car's parts possess this function individually; it emerges when all subsystems unite. Every system has the property of emergence, and if it doesn't, it's not a system.

The third property of classical systems is **hierarchy**^[We will discuss the hierarchy of physical systems within one another. This part-whole relationship differs from the relationships of "class-member of the class" and "superclass-subclass."]. Hierarchy can be visualized like a nested doll: one system is part of another, which is superordinate. The property of hierarchy means that any system is itself a superordinate system for certain subsystems and is also part of a larger superordinate system. Declaring a system automatically implies the existence of subsystems and a superordinate system.

All three properties of the classical systems approach help **identify relevant objects in the physical world**, maintain focus on the system itself, and, when necessary, examine its structure (subsystems) while not losing connection to the physical world (superordinate system).

**Let's consider an example – the system of "a clock."** First, you can always represent this system in the physical world. Clocks have the property of wholeness, with defined boundaries. They also have the emergent property, meaning they have a function – to show time. This function appears only when all parts of the clock are assembled. No individual clock part has this attribute. The hierarchy manifests in that each clock component is part of the overall system, while the dial itself has subsystems. Each subsystem has its properties of wholeness, emergence, and hierarchy.

Thus, the classical systems approach sets a particular way of thinking or viewing the world through the properties of systems, and we will employ this cognitive technique in future generations of systems approach 2.0 and 3.0.