---
order: 1
title: Intellect Stack and Self-Development Stack
---

Let's imagine you've been tasked with understanding transportation operations, the banking sector, or IT. You might address this challenge based on your practical experience. However, if you're an IT specialist, you might not be well-versed in roads, and vice versa. Perhaps roads might not be your area of expertise. And maybe you're also not very familiar with banking terminology. So, you might not even know where to start. But if you use a systems approach, your intellect will focus on the objects present in any field: roles, methods (practices)^[In this course, the terms "method" and "practice" will be used synonymously. Note, however, that in some cases, "practice" refers to activities that contrast with theory.], work products, systems, architecture, and other systems concepts.

Intellect (thinking mastery) helps tackle new challenges, and therefore, its development isn't suited to applied disciplines^[You can't develop intellect by studying operational management, accounting, or the breaststroke. Of course, the more you learn and solve new problems, the more your intellect is likely to develop. But besides practical activities, understanding theory is necessary. Thus, the development of intellect relies on both theory and practical activities.]. Intellect as an ability is demonstrated when dealing with something new: an unfamiliar work problem, personal life situation, or learning a new theory and acquiring new tools. And even if it were possible to devise applied theories for all new problems, an individual could not know them all. Intellect helps in studying necessary theories, and strong intellect allows doing so much faster.

Everyone has an innate intellect that predominantly develops through practice: children learn to deal with new life challenges—crawling, walking, running, speaking, managing attention, etc. As we mature, knowledge becomes critically important for intellectual development. And we aren't talking about just any disciplines, but rather those that help tackle new problems. This is what distinguishes them from applied disciplines, which solve a specific class of tasks. Therefore, we call such intellectual disciplines **transdisciplines**. A transdiscipline sets concepts and principles for multiple disciplines or fields of knowledge^[For example, the transdiscipline of mathematics sets the mathematical language for other disciplines like physics, chemistry, etc. A transdiscipline is also a discipline, but it's important to emphasize the relationship between different theories as "transdiscipline - discipline." Other classifications exist, such as "fundamental and humanitarian."]. 

The full **list of transdisciplines in the intellect stack** **includes**^[The order of transdisciplines in the intellect stack is approximate, and utilizing explanations may require knowledge from lower-stack transdisciplines. Moreover, the intellect stack represents a knowledge matrix where various transdisciplines and explanations are intertwined.]: 1. Systems Engineering 2. Methodology 3. Rhetoric 4. Ethics 5. Aesthetics 6. Research 7. Rationality 8. Logic 9. Algorithmics 10. Ontology 11. Concept Theory 12. Physics 13. Mathematics 14. Semantics 15. Composure 16. Conceptualization.

The intellect stack literally ingrains the intellect with specific concepts, principles, and thinking techniques, helping us think abstractly, adequately, consciously, rationally, and using systems approach. It allows the development of thinking models, working with data, and acting in the real world. With the intellect stack, it becomes easier and faster to comprehend new areas of work and life, focus, reason without obvious mistakes, and create successful systems.

At Aisystant, in addition to conscious intellectual development through the intellect stack, they teach **applied practices of the student role**. Like drivers or managers have their own sets of applied theories, students have designated applied practices—these are **self-development practices**.

The "Self-Development Practices" course collects such universal practices that can be used throughout life (like arithmetic): time investment and accounting; systematic slow reading; thinking through writing; thinking by speaking; organizing leisure; shaping the environment; strategizing; planning.

We refer to conscious mastery of self-development practices as **new or second literacy.** These practices are seen as personal practices of a culturally aware person of the 21st century, who consciously learns throughout life. The "Self-Development Practices" course helps illuminate what "the ability to learn" entails and how these practices form the mastery of self-development – the capacity to develop independently and infinitely. If you effectively master student practices, they, along with intellect, will also help you learn faster.