---
order: 7
title: System Approach 3.0
---

**In the first generation of systems thinking**, systems were considered "objective" rather than subjective, meaning they often overlooked numerous stakeholders. For example, a chair, hammer, or car are systems that seem clear to everyone as they have a defined purpose (role and function), and only this aspect was typically considered. This clarity allowed formal modeling to focus solely on the most essential elements within systems^[Without giving due attention to the multitude of other interests and interactions.], which is why textbooks from the first generation of systems thinking are filled with formulas, numbers, and the like.

At the end of the last century and into the early 21st century, **the second generation of systems thinking** became predominant. It differed from its predecessor by viewing systems as subjective rather than objective. This perspective introduced numerous stakeholders and recognized that systems do not exist independently but arise when someone needs them. Recall how in section 2, we discussed the "hammer" system and its distinction from the physical object called a "hammer." Moreover, in the first generation, systems seemed to create themselves, whereas, in the second generation, they are crafted by people.

In the 2020s, there began a noticeable emergence of works that can be classified as the **third generation of systems thinking**. Our intelligence stack also leans on these modern trends and expands them. The fundamental principles of this third generation are:

* **Scalelessness**: This means applying the same approach and reasoning to objects of vastly different scales, from tiny details to entire systems or from superstrings to the universe.
* **De-anthropomorphism**: This involves not highlighting humans as something essential, hence we speak of agents with varying levels of consciousness, memory, modeling ability, and computational power for action planning.
* **Multilevel evolution**: This doesn't refer only to genes but also to memes, overcoming numerous problems and discrepancies between system levels, and reaching an ethical standpoint in decision-making.
* **Continuous development**^[Particularly relevant in systems engineering and more thoroughly explored in the corresponding course. This principle includes advanced generative modeling, good documentation, configuration management, and system modularity. Development occurs incrementally with small and fast changes to adapt to constantly changing conditions. The primary goal of continuous development is long-term success and preserving achieved results.]—that is, the development of a system (product) never ceases and continues indefinitely, considering environmental changes across different system levels and issues arising during development (including within the development organization).

The third generation of systems approach deals with a scaleless systems world rather than a "world of people," with these systems in a state of continuous evolution and constant process. In this process of development (and sometimes destruction) **frustrations** between system levels lead to conflicts between all levels (system and creation chains).

Systems at different systemic levels strive to maintain stability and develop, but this often conflicts with the desires for stability and development of systems at the same or different levels. For example, countries might go to war with each other or collapse internally due to disagreements among individual communities and interest groups. Moreover, throughout evolution, meta-systemic transitions frequently occur because of the **inevitable** **frustrations between system levels**. As a result, only certain system configurations survive, those that best solve the task of multilevel (as opposed to single-level) optimization.

It is important to note that the principles of the third generation of systems approach can be discussed considering the terms introduced in this section. For instance, **it is impossible to consider only one system level**^[This risks a fatal mistake.], necessitating thinking and, if necessary, cooperation with other teams working on different system levels. Successful systems are those where the satisfaction of interests (optimization of conflicts and frustrations) occurs simultaneously across different levels, even ones unknown to us. At the very least, there should always be an attempt to learn about all frustrations.

You will explore the third generation of systems thinking in more detail in the course "Systems Thinking."