---
title: Role as a Model of Thinking
---

An ordinary person acts intuitively or based on experience, and their role behavior is conditioned by the theory that was previously embedded in them^[A person can unconsciously absorb theory from interactions with others. Often, a person learns unconsciously, absorbing information from the environment or mimicking someone they consider authoritative.]. We often say that a person acts according to their worldview.

A **worldview** can be formed by scientific theory or a grandmother's prejudice. Scientific theories and disciplines better describe role behavior, but non-scientific worldviews are simpler and therefore more in demand by most. When we talk about an engineer's worldview, we primarily mean engineering methods learned in college and further developed in professional work.

A conscious way of studying professional roles involves setting appropriate practices. One might say that a **person instills discipline in their mind and masters the skill of handling tools (technologies)**. For example, a driver learns traffic rules and practices driving a car. Rules are the theory (discipline), while the car is the tool. After this, it can be said that the person mastered the role of a driver, i.e., studied the practice of "driving a car," which results in the work artifact – a moved physical object (people, cargo).

A similar thought process is applicable to all actions a person undertakes, not only at work but also in **personal life**. For example, roles such as son, educator, student, motivator, dish-washer, room cleaner, metro passenger, etc., can be defined. We examine them just like professional roles, focusing on methods (theories, technologies, and work artifacts).

Role consideration allows for special or **formal attention**^[This means highlighting the theory with its concepts, principles, etc.] to be given to one’s behavior. For example, when learning to swim, we understand that mastering the technique (method, practice) of freestyle swimming is necessary, and then we can perform the role of a freestyle swimmer professionally^[Note that the text specifically uses the terms "role," "method," and "role behavior" together. Train your brain to distinguish these terms. Just as you differentiate other classes of concepts. For instance, you don't confuse furniture and colors. You can discuss chairs, tables, and wardrobes separately, and their colors, sizes, etc., separately. This type machine is developed over a lifetime, but special training can significantly accelerate this process. Both the "hours of exposure" and quality training (which reduces the required time) are important. Read more about the type engine in the "Systems Thinking" textbook.]. In critical situations involving child-rearing, one should avoid following poor automatism and getting nervous; instead, recalling the educator role allows finding a good method to use in communication with the child.

When embarking on learning, it helps to understand what **practices of a student are or what learning skills are**. The concept of "role" allows translating unconscious actions into conscious ones, thus focusing on formal objects of attention (method, system, other roles, etc.). Typically, people learn unconsciously and cannot name formal learning methods (practices), meaning how or with which practices they learn.

**Think about which** **methods** **you learn with?** For example, why did the first homework assignment in the course discuss systematic reading and monitoring information consumption, the Pomodoro method, and time investment, writing-thinking, and speaking-thinking? These were the primary practices of the student's role mentioned^[All are detailed in the "Self-Development Practices" course.].

However, we do not always need to be conscious and formally approach the review of our actions. Behavioral automatism saves attention, so we execute some roles unconsciously. For example, when we brush our teeth or take a shower. **If we do not want to change behavior or the world** **around us, there’s no need to** **trouble ourselves** **with role consideration**. But if you need to establish or change the tooth brushing process, you should consciously highlight the role of a tooth cleaner and find the best method for oral hygiene. Then, understand and master the tools – toothbrush, paste, mouthwash, irrigator. Afterward, bring this role behavior to automation.

Changing one's behavior literally means changing thinking (mastering new techniques), and to do this, we need to pay attention to our actions. The **concept** **of "role"** **as a model of thinking** allows this to happen, while mental craftsmanship helps find and quickly establish necessary applied practices.

It is important to understand that each project role involves a **method** (**practice)** **and a work artifact.** Naming a person by their role simultaneously defines an entire class of practices through which the role creates work artifacts. For instance, for the role of a swimmer, we immediately determine a possible class of practices – freestyle, breaststroke, butterfly stroke; and speaking of an entrepreneur, we mean other practices – Business Model Canvas, Lean Startup, Lean Canvas, and others. I hope you already understand that each role has a large number of practices: surgeons, operational managers, financiers, engineers, architects, educators, etc., all have their own.

In ancient times, masters simply did their work and rarely thought about the strict formalization of their actions. Yet unique historical objects were created then. However, the complexity of the modern world is entirely different, but through the formalization of work methods, more people can be masters of their craft, and humanity can create a larger number of successful systems overall.

Without role consideration, it is impossible to cope with the complexity of humanity's current stage of development. A modern person will always be in demand if constantly learning and timely relearning. Systems thinking is a **way** **to formalize** the actions and behavior of numerous interested individuals. The concept of "role" is the main concept for such formalization.