---
title: Roles and Executors
---

The concept of “**role**” was initially used to separate a person from their actions (role behavior). Now we speak about **agents**^[Agents can be people or other entities with intentions, strategies, and plans to achieve their goals. For example, an organization of people with their tools and computers, and even some other entities we don't even know yet. They can also play different roles in different projects and interact with other agents.] with intentions, not necessarily about a person, but also about **inanimate physical objects**. There are many agents and objects, but far fewer roles.

Agents are associated with certain concepts – such as dissatisfactions, intentions, qualifications, etc., and with the roles they play, others – methods, objects of interest, preferences, and so on. But we can also say that the role of a “hammer” can be fulfilled by a “stone.” There are certain features: agents have specific intentions and therefore must decide to fulfill the role themselves^[Or do it through interaction with another agent, that is, through leadership, another agent places them in the role.], while a **stone is placed in the role only by some agent.** We will primarily consider the more complex case of a role executor as an agent^[When it comes to a physical inanimate object (non-agent), this is ordinary engineering.].

Despite the fact that all people and other agents are different, **most actions are similar**, so they can be described and formalized as a method. Moreover, they can be improved and, most importantly, others can be trained in these actions. For example, surgeons are taught the same actions in the same way. Moreover, in some cases, the role of a surgeon is no longer performed by a human but by artificial intelligence.

A regular person in an enterprise rarely uses the theatrical metaphor. Mainly everyone views their colleagues as executors, meaning they know them by their names and surnames. But a systems actor, in addition, understands the roles that each team member performs. This is an important Systems skill (technique), which should become a habit for you. Read the dialogue shown in the picture^[It's taken from the textbook “Systems Thinking.”].

**In a project, you should see both project roles and names of executors.** Often the same roles can be performed by several people, and one person can perform several roles. Though this is rare, the same person can play some roles in one project and different roles in another. In each role, the person acts by a specific method.

A person may not realize they are acting by some method, if they have not consciously studied it at a university^[A surgeon is unlikely to work in their specialty without conscious study of theory and practice at a university, but many other roles and methods are not studied so consciously.]. Within many teams, you can always find autodidacts^[Most actions in life are performed by a person without understanding the concept of “method.” For example, many people manage personal finances or swim but did not specifically learn this. However, in professional life, without conscious study of modern methods, it's impossible to become a professional. And without intelligence, it is impossible to navigate numerous applied methods and master them faster than others.]. But there are few good autodidacts, far more talented or ordinary people who managed to develop their abilities through conscious learning of methods and the transdisciplinary intelligence stack.

A role executor is characterized by qualification in a specific craft. For example, how good a surgeon a person is. And this qualification depends at least on the modernity of the studied theory (discipline) and the number of practical working hours in the role. Therefore, modern theory and practical activity using the best technologies (tools) are needed.