---
title: Project Roles, Their Methods, and Work Artifacts
---

The concept of "role" is more commonly used in professional activities than in personal life^[Nevertheless, all considerations are applicable for personal projects.]. In work, it mainly concerns project activities, hence the use of the term **project role.** A project role is a role performed by an agent (a person or any other agent with intentions) in a certain project^[If the performer is an inanimate object, we will not use the term "project role," but simply "role."]. Or it is performed by an agent that somehow influences or is connected to the system being created in the project. One could say that project roles are concerned with something. They have a specific subject of interest regarding the system.

In systems thinking, **external and internal project roles** are distinguished.

**Internal or team project roles** are roles performed by project team members and all co-executors^[Project team members and co-executors are those who are also agents.]. At the same time, all roles perform corresponding methods and obtain certain work artifacts. For example, component suppliers implement the practice of supply, resulting in components appearing in the warehouse. All internal project roles are part of an extended enterprise, meaning these roles conceive, create, and support the operation of the system — repair and maintain, as well as dispose of it.

In relation to the car system, internal project roles are the plant manager, design engineer, assembly line worker, service station specialist, marketers, repair workers, designers, testers, component suppliers, liquidators, etc. They all work according to a certain method (practice) and create their work artifacts. The performers of these roles are employees of a large team that works with the car system at all stages — from conception to its disposal.

**External project roles** are considered roles that interact with the finished system. These external project roles can be part of the suprasystem, the supersystem, or the environment. This means that the roles affect the system, or the system affects these project roles. They also perform practices and have their work artifacts^[It is not recommended to call them by general words like "client" or "user," it's better to call them by the roles they themselves identify with, and then their methods will also be understood. For example, if we sell cars, the external project role will not be the client, but the driver or owner.]. For example, in relation to the car system, external project roles are the driver, passenger, pedestrian, environmentalist, and many others. Other external project roles include client, competitor, tax collector, hacker, thief, etc. At the same time, system clients should be divided into several roles that are specific to each system and/or field of activity. For example, a client^[For any system, a client can be identified, so to describe their actions more precisely, it's necessary to define the role more specifically. Don't settle for merely mentioning the word "client," which is common for all systems. Behind "client," there are many specific roles that need to be considered when working with the system.] can be a payer, operator, unpacker, etc. Try to identify the methods and work artifacts of these roles.

A person^[Do not confuse the description, the driver's role, and the user profile, which is often used in marketing. The latter describes the performer of the role (a person).] in a project role makes corresponding decisions and is responsible for them. Or, as they say, puts their "skin in the game." The consequences of these decisions lead to changes in project activities, meaning that **the project role changes the world**^[More on this is written in the section "Roles of Analysts and Engineers. Titles" in the textbook "Systems Thinking."]. 

Actions that **do not lead to changes in the physical world** are not considered actions of a project role. One cannot say that a person plays a role if they do not create formal work artifacts for which they are responsible (for example, by signing or otherwise putting their skin in the game). If a person fully executes a practice resulting in the appearance of a work artifact, such as a balance sheet with their signature, then it can be said that they play the role of an accountant. The emergence of a work artifact approved by a project role changes the physical world in one way or another^[At least taxes will be paid.].