---
title: System of interest, role interest, or preference
---

Let's examine in more detail the concepts of "system of interest" and "role interest" (preference). It is important to remember that when we speak of a project role (where the actor is an agent), we automatically imply that this role has a certain system of interest, meaning something about it is intriguing. Ultimately, systems thinking values not so much the roles as the characteristics of the system needed by the roles**. Through roles and their** **methods** **one can reach the system's characteristics.** It can be said that a role is concerned with certain important systems of interest.

**The system of interest is some** **important** **characteristic of the system,** and this mental technique of separating "system" from "systems of interest" in discussion is significant to us. For example, a car as a system can be characterized by cost, speed, color, design, and much more ^[The international standard ISO 42010 provides an approximate list of systems of interest: functionality, achievability, usage, system purpose, system capabilities, system properties, known constraints, structure, behavior, performance/productivity, resource use, reliability, protection, information integrity and security, complexity, ability to evolve, openness, parallel execution, autonomy, cost, timetable, quality of service, flexibility in use, flexibility in development, modifiability, modularity, control, inter-process communication, deadlocks, state changes, subsystem integration, data availability, privacy, compliance with legislation, justifications, organizational goals and strategies, user experience, maintainability, price acceptability, and ease of decommissioning and disposal. As you understand, this list is not exhaustive, different systems may have other characteristics (systems of interest).]. The buyer is interested in the car's cost, so it can be said that their system of interest is the price (or cost). Note that the system of interest pertains to the system's role, not the agent (role performer). Ivan Ivanovich or Petr Petrovich as a buyer^[Role performers can vary but the mental technique allows identifying at least briefly what is common to them, namely that they are interested in the car's price.] share the same system of interest in the car's price.

Meanwhile, **systems of interest should not be confused with system functions**. Functions of different systems can be unique, while systems of interest are often common to many systems. For example, a chair and a table have different functions, but the systems of interest for these systems can be named the same: cost, size, stability, reliability, etc.

It should be noted that important system characteristics in themselves—i.e., their selection and implementation—are a separate system of interest for **the architect's role**. Thus, for an architect's work, system characteristics are needed. For example, an architect is interested in systems of interest such as reliability, security, resilience, scalability, availability, continuity, performance, configurability, extendibility, reusability, localization, maintainability, portability, upgradeability, etc.

An architect works with these systems of interest (highlighting the most important ones), which are called **architectural characteristics**, and as a result, a constructive solution emerges^[The design of the system as a "transparent box".] or a proposal to divide the system into specific modules^[More on this in the "Systems Engineering" course.]. An architectural solution helps to divide the system into modules. You are not required to know architectural methods or work as an architect, but you must understand the essence of architectural work from a systems thinking perspective: what an architect does and what their work artifact is. Similarly, you may not know how to perform plumbing work in an apartment, but you are well aware of a plumber's job and can even assign tasks to them and accept their work.

Many different roles may share the same system of interest. However, **role interest** among all these roles may differ. Therefore, another concept is introduced—**preference**^[For instance, an architect, through decisions regarding system modularity, offers different options for considering these preferences: the more/less some system of interest is, the better. This serves as a subject for negotiation and compromises in the process of satisfying the interests of project roles. Preference is often used as a synonym for "role interest".]. It indicates what a specific role wants in the systems of interest. Cost interests not only the buyer but also the seller, but their preferences or role interests differ. The system of interest is the same, yet the buyer prefers a lower price, and the seller—a higher one. Thus, the roles' preferences (or role interest) differ, while the system of interest is the same.

Highlighting a project role simultaneously implies that there are certain systems of interest. **Project role names in culture are tied to** **systems of interest** **in the system**. The system of interest for a manager in the "enterprise" system is terms, finances, budget, etc. That is, the manager is interested not in the entire enterprise but in its specific characteristics. Other roles are interested in different system characteristics^[A practice manager is interested in the methods and practices used in the enterprise. For example, this role will be curious about which IT program is used in a car plant's design bureau: does it allow 2D or 3D modeling?]. You can also imagine interest as a variable and preference as its specific value.

Knowledge of systems of interest as knowledge of project role names is a **general** **overview**. Most people have a good activity overview in the field of medicine. Some have it much better than in areas of entrepreneurship, engineering, and management. You know there are many different doctors, and you even suspect their systems of interest. For instance, you can distinguish between a therapist and a pediatrician, understand what otolaryngologists and dentists are interested in. However, you are unlikely to name at least three roles within the "engineers" or "managers" class unless you've specifically studied this. Therefore, after studying systems thinking, it is essential to study system management and systems engineering^[These are overview trans-disciplines useful for any specialists wanting to possess strong intelligence.].

A successful agent needs to understand the roles and interests of project activities in general much more than in a specific area. Our educational program is aimed precisely at forming a general overview.