---
title: Successful System
---

In modern systems thinking through project roles, items of interest, and role interests, the concept of a "**successful system**" is introduced.

**A system is considered successful if the role interests of all external and internal project roles are taken into account.** The project team identifies all interested project roles and tries to determine all possible items of interest. Then they consider the preferences of the identified roles concerning relevant items of interest. After which, the team decides which project roles' role interests will be satisfied in creating the system^[At the same time, several systems are considered in the project, which makes it complex — it's important not to get confused in the items of interest.].

The thinking technique consists of considering (counting) the maximum number of roles and their items of interest, while only the role interests (preferences) of those roles chosen by the team are satisfied. **It is impossible to satisfy all role interests.** There is not enough time and resources for this. However, by considering everything and satisfying only the main items of interest and the corresponding role interests, the team "puts their skin in the game" and takes on risks, understanding what costs they might incur. This is precisely why the team needs transdisciplinary ethics^[And the larger your market or the more complex the system, the greater the need for professional philosophers practicing applied ethics. For example, why consider the interests of environmentalists, but not the interests of workers. This is explained in more detail in the ethics course.].

For example, the team may **consider** a customer's role interest in a low price, but it is not obliged to **satisfy** this preference. For instance, after working through this role interest, the team decided to set a price higher than the preference. By setting a certain price, the team may make a miscalculation and bear responsibility in the form of lost profit or reduced market share. In such decisions, a **fatal error** cannot be made, but ordinary mistakes are inevitable. An important technique here is hypothesis formulation and continuous development^[Applying the principle of incremental development (based on feeling it out) instead of the life cycle according to some definite and pre-planned order.].

Note that the team is obliged not only to choose which preferences to consider but also to strive to identify all possible items of interest. They concern not only financial aspects.

Notice that in your projects, predominantly discussed items of interest are profit, timelines, quality. This means that certain project roles express their role interests^[They prefer higher profit, shorter timelines, and higher quality.]. From a systems thinking perspective, we cannot call a system successful if only these role interests are satisfied. Because if, for example, the system can harm human health, the company will not fare well in the future.

Thus, first, the team identifies all possible project roles and their items of interest. Then each role interest is considered, and a decision is made about what to do with it: satisfy it or not? This is a conscious decision for which the team is responsible. The team puts its “skin in the game” when it determines the list of project roles whose role interests will be worked on in the project and ultimately satisfied in the system.

Some role interests the team may decide not to satisfy. But if the team has worked through all the items of interest and preferences, then they are considered. However, possibly not all of them will be satisfied. **To consider and to satisfy are different things.**

In the scheme above, you see how systems thinking proposes achieving a successful system. Note that behind each word in this scheme is significant work. In the course, we will discuss all these concepts and actions that project roles need to perform to achieve a successful system.