---
title: 'Role Performers: Agent and Their Intention, Strategy, and Plans'
---

When dealing with roles, one cannot overlook the role performer as the agent. An agent is a person or other entity (organization, teams, or soon AI) that intends to take actions to eliminate dissatisfaction. A person is too broad a concept^[For example, when discussing a person, one could also consider the organism and its structure. But we will not do this, so the concept of "agent" allows us to narrow the broad concept of "person."]. We need to focus on the dissatisfactions and desires of the person that drive their actions.

When it comes to a person, there is a risk of slipping into psychological terminology, which is less formal and unsuitable for system modeling. Therefore, to discuss the human-agent, the concept of "intention" is introduced^[Do not confuse: intention relates to the human-agent or performer, whereas preference relates to the role. Therefore, it is correct to say: "the person intends to take action" and "the person in the role has a role interest" or "the role has a role interest." It is incorrect from a system thinking perspective to say: "the role has an intention," but "the person pursues a role interest."]. Intention allows discussing not the role but its performer. That is, "preference" relates to the role, and "intention" relates to the performer of the role.

In the textbook "Systemic Self-Development," a **scheme connecting psychology and system thinking** was introduced. Here we will refine it a bit. Feeling dissatisfaction, a human-agent intends to take on a role to eliminate this dissatisfaction through action according to a method. At the same time, the agent in the role, using this method, participates in creating some system.

The agent acts according to the role and thereby pursues a role interest (preference) towards the system. But the agent can also intentionally switch between roles, and accordingly, we can see a change in preferences. For example, we expect a person to play one role and pursue the corresponding role interests, but finds they have switched roles and are pursuing another role interest. And even possibly to a completely different system. To work with the agent's intentions, separate practices are needed^[Essentially, it's about creating a system that must perform a specific role. But this system is not made of metal, plastic, and other materials but "of flesh and blood." An inanimate system is created exclusively by engineering methods, but for a biological system, this is not enough. If you need to work at the level of body parts, doctors will have to be involved, at the gene level — neurobiologists, and at the level of the whole organism — trainers (for example, teaching swimming), educators (teaching professional methods), and system leaders (helping to adopt the right roles).], primarily **system leadership**. System leadership is a method for placing the performer-agent in a project role. An inanimate physical object is placed in a role using regular engineering methods^[For example, mechanical engineering "places" a specific "Engine M-1245" in the role of a car motor.], and for the agent, in place of these methods will be system leadership.

The concept of "intention" is primarily necessary to identify specific people who are related to your system and project. Through these specific people, project roles must be identified, or conversely, project roles should be connected with specific people.

It often happens that you are surrounded by many people, but you cannot understand what their intentions are, and accordingly, do not understand if they are **interested parties**^[A person may play some other role in the discussion process. One that does not relate to your project. At that moment, the actor-person intends to play not the role you expect from them but another. Then, at that moment, you do not have an interested role, or rather, there is no actor in that role. This is where system leadership is needed if you want to change the intention of the actor-person.]. Sometimes, on the contrary, there is no one around you, or you work in a small team, but there are people somewhere who want something from you or your project. By identifying the intentions of these people, one can better understand whether they are interested parties and what roles they play concerning your system.

Thus, working with project roles, it is necessary to know all performers and their intentions. If the performers' intentions are not related to your project's roles, then you have chosen the performers incorrectly, or you will need to change their intentions.