---
title: Systems Documentation
---

Descriptions reflect **everything most important about the system**, that is, everything that answers the interests of project roles which have been decided to satisfy when creating the system. Creating a consistent description increases the likelihood of realizing a successful system of interest in the physical world.

System modeling is carried out through **thinking by writing**, in which special tools in the form of **modelers** are involved. For example, such modelers can be pen and paper, Word, a wall with sticky notes and a marker, and more advanced modelers are Coda^[For high-level modeling, which describes all important systems and subsystems, as well as their interrelation.], CAD (computer-aided design)^[For more detailed (subject-specific, application) design, including creating design and technological documentation.] etc.

The work artifact of system modeling using modelers is documentation**.** Documentation ultimately becomes external memory for the team (exocortex)^[On the one hand, the modeler is also an exocortex, but the result of the modeling is considered an exocortex as well. This is an analogy with the brain, which conducts thinking, and then there is a result also contained in the brain. But we consider that documentation is not the biological brain, but paper or computer models, to which not only their developer can have access.]. **The format of the documentation**^[The content of the documentation is descriptions, and they are determined by the interests of project roles in the system.] can be text, outlines, tables, computer models, etc.

Our course is also a modeler in the form of tables or high-level models in which important concepts of systems thinking are interconnected. Using the course as a simulator, you can practice mastering the necessary concepts for such **high-level** **modeling** (not fully relating to the subject area). To high-level modeling, we relate to designation^[The name and short description (e.g., function, design, etc.).] of all important systems and subsystems, as well as their interrelationships. Moreover, to understand high-level models, at least, you need to understand the connection between the method of description and subjects of interest, the difference between a "black" and "transparent" box, and also broaden your horizons regarding the names and content of main documents in principal areas of interest^[For example, you need to know what documents "Concept of use" and "System concept" are, as well as how they differ from the "Balance sheet" or "Target audience description".].

Later, you can use any spreadsheet editor (for instance, Coda) to describe your project and the systems involved at the top level. However, for subject modeling and creating appropriate documents for role interests, it is necessary to use applied theories and tools^[They should be studied separately. For example, to compile a balance sheet document (as a response to interest—taxes), you will need to study the theory of accounting and master the tool (for example, 1C).]. For instance, CAD, 1C, PDM (Product Data Management)^[Product data management system or product versioning system.], CRM (customer relationship management)^[CRM contains databases describing clients as a whole system in the physical world, with parts of clientele being separate clients.] and many others.

Within our course, you will learn about the **types of documents that can be and the subjects of interest they respond to, how they are connected, and with what methods of descriptions they are created**. However, in the course^[And even within the systems thinking course.] you will not study and create specific documents with models and descriptions. For example, we will discuss documents describing the target audience or project roles, and also discuss the concept of use and architecture, but to develop specific instances of these documents, you will need to study the relevant applied practices (description methods).

Usually, in a project or enterprise team, there are specialists in applied methods (marketers, architects, product owners, etc.) who specialize in developing certain documents with descriptions of various subjects of interest. The aim of our course is to understand that all these documents can be viewed in the same way^[For example, see the roles that create them, and understand with which methods. Or pay attention to the project roles for which the created documentation will be addressed.] and see their interrelation, and for this, it is necessary to first master the **system language.** That is, know the relevant concepts of system modeling.