---
title: Method of Description
---

You already know that a system definition consists of role-based descriptions, which in turn consist of models. To draft a role-based description, a method of description (practice) is necessary. The method of description is presented as a **theory**, which explains how to create descriptions of the system and the necessary **tools** to produce a work artifact (documentation). Metamodels are specified in the theory, and when filled with data, they become models. Models can be on different media, such as on paper or in a computer. And then we talk about documentation.

It is easiest to consider that the method of description, from a substantive point of view, is a set of symbols for multilayered map-models that describe the territory. The territory is the system, the map is the documentation with a description of the system, but there is a method of creating the map^[For instance, the photogrammetric method for creating topographical maps.], which includes metamodels, concepts, principles, etc. However, the theory of creating this description, along with the technology of creating the map, is the method of description.

The **universality** of the **high-level modeling approach** means that the description is made in response to a certain subject of interest (or preference) to a particular system, and for this, the role(s) uses a specific method of description, through which documentation is created for another role. For example, a topological map is created in response to the interest "relief" of the system "territory" (of a certain area). The map is created by topographers and used by surveyors, geologists, or geographers, and possibly by planners who create a house project.

The method of description allows the creation of descriptions of any systems. Of course, first of all, attention must be paid to the system of interest, but in **project activities or in the enterprise, you encounter many documents describing the most diverse systems** (supersystems, subsystems, creating systems, etc.).

In the above table, you see the **relationship of the concepts role, interest, role-based description, and method of description**. Note that you may often have seen similar role-based descriptions in the form of documents. Many of you possess various methods of descriptions, through which you create certain documents. Be sure to describe your roles, methods of description, and work artifacts in the corresponding modeling exercise from the course.

The interest of different roles may be the same, but role-based descriptions different. One role may have several interests. In this case, **one description can be created that answers several** **subjects** **of interest.**

It is necessary to choose description methods correctly. For example, tax, financial, and management descriptions require different methods. For tax -- tax and accounting records, for financial description -- IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards) or US GAAP, and for financial-management description, there are methods of management accounting. Note that all three descriptions (methods and work artifacts) are created for three different roles -- for a tax specialist, a shareholder, and a manager.

You already understand well that **quality role-based descriptions cannot be made if the role-based method of description** **and corresponding documentation** **are not considered** **explicitly**. That is, they cannot be done unconsciously. Awareness in applying the method of description increases the likelihood that you will notice the need to master a new method in time.