---
title: Descriptions and documentation of different areas of interest
---

At the end of the subsection "How to think about systems?" we were interested in approaches to **describing any system** as "black" and "transparent" boxes^[These approaches apply to both the system of interest and the supersystem, to our system or the creating system.], and we examined them in previous parts. In this subsection, we will deal with specific types of descriptions across different areas of interest in **project activities.**

The fact is, in project activities (or in an enterprise) **you are surrounded by a multitude of various documents with descriptions of various systems**^[At different system levels or creating chains.]. Meanwhile, many projects are ongoing at once within the enterprise, and you may participate in several of them. In your daily work activities, you might not necessarily or always be making descriptions of the system of interest. For example, personally, you might describe clientele, create some subsystems of the conveyor for producing the system of interest, or simply fill out financial templates.

Refer once again to Table 3x3 and pay attention to the listing of work artifacts in each cell. Consider each cell and try to find your cell(s) and the work artifacts you work with and create.

For example, note that the system of interest as a "black box" in terms of its role behavior (cell 1.2 of Table 3x3) is described as a "concept of use". Although at your specific enterprise, there may not be such an exact name, that is, the "concept of use" may be called otherwise^[Concept of use documentation can be called differently at a particular enterprise: standard documents, use cases, technical specifications, files with scenario diagrams in some languages, fragments of a database with an information model.]. **The exact name of the work artifact in each cell** **of Table 3x3** **also depends on the subject area and the chosen method of description**. If you are creating a car, you will have one set of methods of description across all cells, but if an IT system, then another.

Systems thinking will help you better communicate with specialists, but you also need to consciously^[Awareness arises when you draw attention to your roles, best sota-methods, objects of interest and preferences, work artifacts, etc.] understand your **subject area**, including reaching into the physical world. That is, knowing from which cell of Table 3x3 you view other project roles^[All other team members or external project roles.] and with which work artifacts you communicate with them.

If you do not know your subject area and do not mentally reach into changes in the physical world (i.e., to specific work artifacts), it is a direct path to failure. You will describe strange things, implement random changes in the physical world, or not affect the physical world with your ideas at all.

In our course, we merely draw attention to the fact that there are different areas of interest and that in each of them, documentation is created using specific methods of description. Each enterprise has **employees who specialize in specific subject areas** and use methods of description to create this documentation.

For example, a marketer (in cell 1.1 of Table 3x3) creates a description of the target audience. And from our course, you already understand what this documentation is, what role it plays, and for whom this work artifact is created. You should also already understand that the clientele is a system in the real/physical world, and a computer CRM system in relation to this clientele is much like a photograph of a person is to a person — a document with a description and convenient means of viewing the document.

However, you are unlikely to be able to create this "clientele" system or even documentation with its description if you are not the corresponding specialist. The same applies to all other cells of Table 3x3. **In our course, you obtained** **a high-level** **understanding of all areas of interest and studied a universal** **approach to modeling** any system. But specific modeling and creating of systems are the work of applied specialists. The good news is that now you know how to interact with them. That is, you understand their objects of interest, methods, work artifacts, and so on.