---
title: Example of a description of the relationship between supersystem interests and the system of interest
---

Let's consider the differences between the concept of use, the concept of the system, and architectural documentation. **The systems thinking technique consists of** **first considering the system** **as a "black box"** or from the perspective of the concept of use. We first look outside the system (how it is operated), and based on the concept of use, we delve into its internal structure by creating a concept of the system and architectural documentation.

**The concept of use** and use scenarios are descriptions upwards from the boundary of the system of interest, which answers the question "how the system performs its function." This is the description of the system as a "black box." Previously, system requirements were developed, but now the concept of use is developed. For more on the death of requirements engineering, refer to the courses "Systems Thinking" and "Systems Engineering."

Viewing the system as a "transparent box" involves proposing a functional decomposition for the system (from the system's function to subsystem functions) and subsequent modular synthesis. This is described in the **system concept**.

At the same time, when viewing the "transparent box," **architectural documentation** is separately highlighted. It reflects the decision on the modular division of the system to satisfy the main (architectural) characteristics of the system or items of interest^[Architectural decisions may include the choice of constraints and modules, the connection between modules, and other factors. Important architectural characteristics may include the system's capacity for development, ease of making changes, and availability. For more on the concept of architecture, see the course "Systems Engineering."].

At the same time, all these documents are "live," meaning all these descriptions are hypotheses that need to be tested, changed, substantiated, and agreed upon. Testing occurs through changing systems, with the system initially created as an MVP^[Minimal Viable Product].] and then continuously developed through increments^[Small improvements to the product, which are ready for use immediately after completion. Increments are opposed to iterations, after which something will be ready for use only at the end of the project (all iterations).]. Architecturally, **increments** are released for as loosely coupled as possible modules by autonomous teams. Thus, continuous system development is achieved.

Note that **systems thinking is recursive**, meaning each creating team applies it uniformly at each system level. Recursiveness means that the concept of use of the system of interest is part of the descriptions of the supersystem's concept. Thus, it turns out that in the creating team of the system of interest, someone deals with the description of the supersystem, someone with the subsystems, and someone else creates the creating team itself. All these systems at different system levels and creation chains must be worked with as part of a single project or the entire enterprise.

In the next section, we will look at how this continuous development and consideration of multiple systems are supported by creating systems.