---
order: 1
title: System Documentation
---

**Descriptions reflect all the most important aspects of a system, meaning everything that addresses the subjects of interest for the project roles that have been decided to satisfy during the system's creation. Crafting a consistent description increases the likelihood of realizing a successful system of interest in the physical world.**

**Systems modeling** is conducted through **thinking through writing**, which involves specialized tools known as modelers. These modelers can include a pen and paper, Word, a wall with sticky notes and a marker, or more advanced modelers like Coda^[For high-level modeling that includes descriptions of all important systems and subsystems and their interactions.], CAD (computer-aided design)^[For more detailed (subject-specific, applied) design, including the creation of design and technological documentation.], and others.

The **work artifact** of systems modeling using modelers is **system documentation**. Documentation eventually becomes external memory for the team (an exocortex)^[In one sense, the modeler itself is an exocortex, but the result of modeling is also considered an exocortex. It's an analogy with the brain, which conducts thinking, and then a result is produced, which is also contained in the brain. However, we will consider documentation as paper or computer models accessible to more than just their developer.]. The format of the documentation^[The contents of the documentation are descriptions, defined by the subjects of interest to the project roles with the system.] might include text, outlines, tables, computer models, etc.

**At Aisystant, our course serves as a modeler in the form of tables or high-level models, connecting important concepts of systems thinking.** By using the course as a simulator, you can practice mastering the necessary concepts for such high-level modeling (not fully related to the subject area). High-level modeling involves designating^[Name and brief description (such as function, structure, etc.).] all critical systems and subsystems and their interconnections. Furthermore, to understand high-level models, one must, at the very least, grasp the relationship between the method of description and the subjects of interest, understand the difference between "black" and "transparent" boxes, and broaden their understanding of the names and contents of key documents across main areas of interest^[For instance, it is important to recognize the documents "Usage Concept" and "System Concept" and understand how they differ from the "Balance Sheet" or "Target Audience Description".].

**Going forward, you can use any spreadsheet editor (e.g., Coda) to describe your project and the systems involved at a high level.** However, for subject-specific modeling and creating corresponding documents for role-based interests, applied theories and tools^[These need to be studied separately. For example, creating a document like a balance sheet (as a response to an interest in taxes) requires studying accounting theory and mastering a tool (e.g., 1C).] are required. Such tools might include CAD, 1C, PDM (Product Data Management)^[A product data management system or product version control system.], CRM (customer relationship management)^[CRM contains databases describing the client base as an entire system in the physical world, with parts of the client base being individual clients.] and many others.

Within our course, you will learn about the types of documents that can exist, which subjects of interest they address, how they are interrelated, and the methods of description used to create them. However, through the course, you will not study or create specific documents with models and descriptions. For example, we will discuss documents that describe the target audience or project roles, and we will also talk about usage concepts and architecture, but to develop specific instances of these documents, you'll need to study corresponding applied practices (description methods).

Typically, within a project team or enterprise, there are specialists in applied methods (such as marketers, architects, product owners, and others) who specialize in developing certain documents with descriptions of various subjects of interest. The aim of our course is to understand that all these documents can be viewed in the same way^[For instance, identifying the roles that create them and understanding the methods used. Or paying attention to the project roles that the created documentation will be addressed to.] and to see their interconnection, and for this, it's essential to first master the systems language. This means knowing the relevant concepts of systems modeling.